doi: 10.2466/pr0.2002.90.2.405. Narcissism and belief in the paranormal Chris A Roe 1, Claire L Morgan Affiliations expand PMID: 12061576 DOI: 10.2466/pr0.2002.90.2.405 Abstract The present study was designed to assess whether the relationship between narcissistic personality and paranormal belief identified by Tobacyk and Mitchell earlier could be replicated with a general population and to see whether the effect could be found with a narrower definition of paranormal beliefs that focuses only on belief in psychic phenomena. 75 participants completed the Narcissistic Personality Inventory and two measures of paranormal belief, the Paranormal Belief Scale and the Australian Sheep Goat Scale. 	Psychol Rep. 2002 Apr;90(2):405:  p907.01
the Narcissistic Personality Inventory and two measures of paranormal belief, the Paranormal Belief Scale and the Australian Sheep Goat Scale. There was no correlation between narcissism and Paranormal Belief Scale scores, but narcissism and Australian Sheep Goat Scale scores were significantly positively correlated. Of the three subscales to the Australian Sheep Goat measure, scores for narcissism correlated with belief in ESP and psychokinesis but not in Life after death. These relationships were interpreted in terms of need for control. Percept Mot Skills. 2011 Dec;113:894 908. doi: 10.2466/09.22.PMS.113.6.894 908. Sensitivity to coincidences and paranormal belief Gergö Hadlaczky 1, Joakim Westerlund Affiliations expand PMID: 22403933 DOI: 10.2466/09.22.PMS.113.6.894 Abstract Often it is 	Psychol Rep. 2002 Apr;90(2):405:  p907.43
to coincidences and paranormal belief Gergö Hadlaczky 1, Joakim Westerlund Affiliations expand PMID: 22403933 DOI: 10.2466/09.22.PMS.113.6.894 Abstract Often it is difficult to find a natural explanation as to why a surprising coincidence occurs. In attempting to find one, people may be inclined to accept paranormal explanations. The objective of this study was to investigate whether people with a lower threshold for being surprised by coincidences have a greater propensity to become believers compared to those with a higher threshold. Participants were exposed to artificial coincidences, which were formally defined as less or more probable, and were asked to provide remarkability ratings. Paranormal belief was measured by the Australian 	Psychol Rep. 2002 Apr;90(2):405:  p907.91
defined as less or more probable, and were asked to provide remarkability ratings. Paranormal belief was measured by the Australian Sheep Goat Scale. An analysis of the remarkability ratings revealed a significant interaction effect between Sheep Goat score and type of coincidence, suggesting that people with lower thresholds of surprise, when experiencing coincidences, harbor higher paranormal belief than those with a higher threshold. The theoretical aspects of these findings were discussed. PLoS One. 2022; 17: e0267360. Published online 2022 May 4. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0267360 PMCID: PMC9067702 PMID: 35507572 Paranormal beliefs and cognitive function: A systematic review and assessment of study quality across four decades of research Abstract Background Research into 	Psychol Rep. 2002 Apr;90(2):405:  p451.33
and cognitive function: A systematic review and assessment of study quality across four decades of research Abstract Background Research into paranormal beliefs and cognitive functioning has expanded considerably since the last review almost 30 years ago, prompting the need for a comprehensive review. The current systematic review aims to identify the reported associations between paranormal beliefs and cognitive functioning, and to assess study quality. Introduction The term “paranormal” typically refers to phenomena, such as psychokinesis, hauntings, and clairvoyance, which contradict the basic limiting principles of current scientific understanding [1]. Surveys consistently indicate paranormal beliefs are prevalent within the general population. For example, a representative survey of British adults 	Psychol Rep. 2002 Apr;90(2):405:  p1.03
[1]. Surveys consistently indicate paranormal beliefs are prevalent within the general population. For example, a representative survey of British adults conducted by the market Comparable levels of belief have been documented across various cultures over recent decades [4–7]. The most frequently used scales to measure paranormal beliefs include Tobacyk’s Paranormal Belief Scale in both original (PBS) [8] and revised form (RPBS) [9], and the Australian Sheep Goat Scale (ASGS) [10]. Despite widespread use, some concerns exist about both the content and the factor structures of these measures [11–13]. Nonetheless, both the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale and Australian Sheep-Goat Scale have demonstrated excellent internal reliability, with Cronbach’s alpha values around 	Psychol Rep. 2002 Apr;90(2):405:  p1.19
both the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale and Australian Sheep-Goat Scale have demonstrated excellent internal reliability, with Cronbach’s alpha values around .93 for the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale [14–16], and around .95 for the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale [17, 18]. sciences, medicine, and psychology showing significantly lower paranormal belief scores than those in education, theology, or artistic disciplines [25, 26]. Higher levels of paranormal beliefs have been documented in women and younger individuals [27–32], though these sex and age effects are inconsistently reported [33] and have generated substantial debate [34–36]. Paranormal beliefs and cognitive function The association between cognitive functioning and paranormal beliefs has been researched over several decades. Such 	Psychol Rep. 2002 Apr;90(2):405:  p1.35
Paranormal beliefs and cognitive function The association between cognitive functioning and paranormal beliefs has been researched over several decades. Such functions include memory, attention, language, and executive function (the umbrella term used to describe set As important for cognitive function is an individual’s belief system. Religious and spiritual beliefs have been associated with slower cognitive decline in older adults [38, 39] but have also been shown to have an inverse relationship with memory performance [40] and intelligence [41, 42]. Similarly, so called “epistemically unwarranted beliefs” [19], which includes belief in conspiracy theories, has been linked with lower educational attainment and reduced analytical thinking [43, 44]. Conspiracist beliefs are similarly 	Psychol Rep. 2002 Apr;90(2):405:  p1.51
in conspiracy theories, has been linked with lower educational attainment and reduced analytical thinking [43, 44]. Conspiracist beliefs are similarly associated with increased illusory pattern perception [45, 46], decreased need for cognition and cognitive reflection [47–49], biases against confirmatory and disconfirmatory evidence [50], and hindsight bias . The last published review to examine the relationships between paranormal beliefs and various aspects of cognition was conducted by Irwin in 1993 [53]. That non systematic narrative review of 43 studies is now almost 30 years old and may have introduced bias by “…citing null results only when these form a substantial proportion of the available data on a given relationship” 	Psychol Rep. 2002 Apr;90(2):405:  p1.67
bias by “…citing null results only when these form a substantial proportion of the available data on a given relationship” . At the time of his review, Irwin [53] concluded that, owing to the variable findings, support for the cognitive deficits hypothesis remained uncertain. Research has grown considerably since Irwin’s [53] review and an updated and systematic review is timely. The current review has two key aims: first, to provide the first assessment of study quality [54] in this area and second, to systematically review and summarise key associations between paranormal beliefs and a range of cognitive functions. 	Psychol Rep. 2002 Apr;90(2):405:  p1.82
characteristics associated with naturalistic haunt experiences. Motivated by previous suggestions in the literature, we addressed the relation between haunt experiences and Paranormal Belief (New Age Philosophy and Traditional Paranormal Beliefs), Participant Expectation, Transliminality, Hypochondriasis, Synesthesia, and Hyperesthesia in a substantial subset of participants who visited Edinburgh\'s reportedly haunted South Bridge Vaults during a recent field study of this commercially oriented site. The seven perceptual personality variables significantly distinguished experients and non experients. Multiple regression analyses indicated that scores on Participant Expectation and New Age Philosophy weakly but significantly predicted the number 	Perceptual:  p0
experients. Multiple regression analyses indicated that scores on Participant Expectation and New Age Philosophy weakly but significantly predicted the number of reported experiences, whereas Participant Expectation and Hyperesthesia weakly but significantly predicted the number of different categories of experience. Post hoc analyses suggested that Transliminality facilitated both of these processes. Our findings are consistent with the notion that some haunts comprise two distinct classes of phenomena that may have different sources Psychological Experiences that are grounded partly in psychophysiological mechanisms, and Physical Changes which are perceived in part due to cognitive and motivational biases on the part of the experient. Haunted by 	Perceptual:  p0.13
Changes which are perceived in part due to cognitive and motivational biases on the part of the experient. Haunted by somatic tendencies: Spirit infestation as psychogenic illness It has been suggested that haunting and poltergeist episodes are akin to outbreaks of contagious psychogenic illness. Therefore, it might be expected that hypochondriacal and somatic tendencies would significantly predict self sources a process that could initiate an episode of contagious (mass) psychogenic illness by encouraging the collective perception of similar \'symptoms\' in a group of people due to suggestion and demand characteristics. From: Uncharted features and dynamics of the South Shields poltergeist \'Dis 	Perceptual:  p0.28
group of people due to suggestion and demand characteristics. From: Uncharted features and dynamics of the South Shields poltergeist \'Dis ease\' denotes a non pathological state of dissonance or alteration in waking experience, whereby an individual\'s natural state of \'ease\' becomes markedly imbalanced or disrupted. recurrent ghostly episodes are an interactionist phenomenon whereby: (a) transliminality is the foundation for percipients\' anomalous experiences, reinforced by belief in the paranormal; (b) \'dis ease\' (or psychological dissonance) as a catalyst for the onset of anomalous experiences; (c) recurrent anomalous experiences exhibit temporal patterns suggestive of psychological contagion; (d) attributions for the anomalous experiences align to 	Perceptual:  p0.43
experiences; (c) recurrent anomalous experiences exhibit temporal patterns suggestive of psychological contagion; (d) attributions for the anomalous experiences align to the percipient\'s biopsychosocial context; and (e) anxiety levels of the percipients relate to the nature, proximity, and spontaneity of the anomalous experiences. In short, the HP S model builds on the transliminal dis ease view of haunt type experiences and equates spontaneous ghostly episodes to some of the fundamental mechanisms that stoke outbreaks of mass (contagious) psychogenic illness Some research indeed suggests that somatization and hypochondriacal tendencies correlate positively with the perception of S/O anomalies . That said, \'cuts, scratches, or 	Perceptual:  p0.58
suggests that somatization and hypochondriacal tendencies correlate positively with the perception of S/O anomalies . That said, \'cuts, scratches, or threatening touches\' appear to be rarer and psychometrically more intense occurrences in ghostly episodes. From: Haunted people syndrome revisited Comparative literature and statistical studies indicate that outwardly disparate encounter experiences often share similar narrative themes and structures. There are also commonalities in the perceptual personality profiles of the experients . These patterns arguably suggest a "family tree" of anomalies that is rooted in a core process and biological structure, but which can change its appearance in accordance with the sociocultural or situational 	Perceptual:  p0.73
in a core process and biological structure, but which can change its appearance in accordance with the sociocultural or situational context in which it manifests.... We should note here that percipients of ghostly episodes also tend to score higher on transliminality and similar measures of thin or permeable mental boundaries . This latter finding implies a heightened susceptibility to high arousal or "dis ease" states. From: case study in putative “Haunted People Syndrome” tend to report these experiences to a greater extent , which implies a heightened susceptibility to high arousal or "dis ease" states. Moreover, research should also examine if 	Perceptual:  p0.88
extent , which implies a heightened susceptibility to high arousal or "dis ease" states. Moreover, research should also examine if the psychometric profiles of focus persons in ghostly episodes apply to self described T.I.s. Many studies on paranormal belief and experience strongly suggest there is an "encounter prone personality" grounded in a permeable (or thin) mental boundary structure . This profile might even capitalise on the potential biological basis or genetic predisposition for anomalous experience. From: Prevalence and Potency of Ghost Narratives Tucker chronicled the haunted dormitory rooms and collegiate spaces where ghost stories create a bond between young adults experiencing stress 	Perceptual:  p1.03
Tucker chronicled the haunted dormitory rooms and collegiate spaces where ghost stories create a bond between young adults experiencing stress in transitioning to independent life. Ghosts, as experiences and narratives, therefore might serve as universal personifications of troubled psyches , or at least partly represent idioms of distress . The constructed narrative finally becomes evidence to the experiencer and the audience . This evidence can subsequently scale quickly from the individual level to group level via perceptual or psychological contagion paralleling outbreaks of mass psychogenic illness . The engagement of people in ghost narratives via meme like \'contagious" processes is not 	Perceptual:  p1.19
outbreaks of mass psychogenic illness . The engagement of people in ghost narratives via meme like \'contagious" processes is not a new idea. One such variable may be the presence of ongoing distress which could conceivably have its origins in a traumatic childhood. Although acute stress has been noted at the time some parapsychological experiences occur (near death and out of body experiences), the presence of stress sensitivity or proneness to ongoing stress among parapsychological experients has not been given due empirical attention, despite explicit appeals to the explanatory value of anxiolytic processes in some studies of anomalous experiences . Recently, Lasikiewicz 	Perceptual:  p1.35
attention, despite explicit appeals to the explanatory value of anxiolytic processes in some studies of anomalous experiences . Recently, Lasikiewicz established an association between currently perceived stress levels and belief in paranormal phenomena, but her survey did not canvass parapsychological experiences. The observation that current levels of perceived stress are related to tendency to anomalous experiences may raise the possibility that anomalous experiences, including ostensibly parapsychological experiences, may serve a defensive or coping role. Relatively little is known about the operation of parapsychological experiences and beliefs as coping mechanisms , and the observed correlation with stress sensitivity warrants further empirical scrutiny 	Perceptual:  p1.51
of parapsychological experiences and beliefs as coping mechanisms , and the observed correlation with stress sensitivity warrants further empirical scrutiny in these terms. Young People and Paranormal Experiences Two qualitative projects have brought together non directive and semi between the ages of 11 and 18. A sequential analysis shows an emotional and cognitive pattern comprising four stages, accompanied by periods of anxiety. Young people move through those stages that correspond to a cognitive acceptance or rejection of what they are experiencing in order to maintain or re establish paradigmatic stability. This study complements the many observations linking paranormal beliefs and anxiety, bringing 	Perceptual:  p1.66
order to maintain or re establish paradigmatic stability. This study complements the many observations linking paranormal beliefs and anxiety, bringing with it the new discovery of a mechanism underlying the link between anxiety and some aspects of paranormal or anomalous experiences in young people. 20% of young people have had paranormal experiences . During this kind of experience, the young person approaches the world based on their subjective experience , whether real or imagined , attracted by, among other things, the thrill seeking more specifically linked to psi beliefs and spiritualism 	Perceptual:  p1.82
priests, history’s magicians: exploring the contentious relationship between authorized heritage and ghost tourism in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania I explore the contentious relationship between ghost tourism and authorized heritage in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania through the classical distinction between magic and religion. Durkheim argues the magic cannot sustain a social universe; it must operate within the bounds the religion creates. Similarly, I show the ghost tourism in Gettysburg reflects the version of the past that authorized heritage constructs. Although actors in the ghost tourism industry recognize the legitimacy of authorized heritage, they see also ghost stories as a more reliable tool for knowing the past, and teaching 	Abstracts 3:  p0
legitimacy of authorized heritage, they see also ghost stories as a more reliable tool for knowing the past, and teaching it to visitors, than authorized heritage has at their disposal. Thus, they mirror Weber’s magicians, whose relationship with the supernatural is based on rationalize formulae. Data for this project were collected over a three day trip to Gettysburg in August 2017. The allure of dark tourism: legend tripping and ghost seeking in dark places. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/333132201 The Allure of Dark Tourism Legend Tripping and Ghost Seeking in Dark Places Legend tripping is a common activity that has traditionally been characterized by adolescent exploration of supernatural folklore for the purpose of testing the legends’ credibility and 	Abstracts 3:  p0.22
that has traditionally been characterized by adolescent exploration of supernatural folklore for the purpose of testing the legends’ credibility and demonstrating the adolescent’s bravery in the face of supernatural danger. For others, legend tripping may entail more nefarious motives, as they seek to vandalize and desecrate places associated with these stories. Recently, legend tripping has been commercialized, perhaps most notably in the form of ghost tourism. For businesses and sometimes entire cities, local ghostly legends offer an opportunity to differentiate themselves in the market, while also providing visitors with an opportunity to engage with these dark histories in ways that are exciting, experiential, and educational. For those participating in ghost hunts and tours, 	Abstracts 3:  p0.48
with these dark histories in ways that are exciting, experiential, and educational. For those participating in ghost hunts and tours, these activities are a unique way to explore issues of mortality, spirituality, and morality. Ghosts and their legends allow us to confront complex and potentially troubling questions about life and death. In a society so preoccupied with hiding the reality of death from public view, ghosts and dark places are a means by which we can engage with this reality as though witnessing it through a veil. In ghost tourism, death is right before our eyes and yet somehow just beyond our grasp. 	Abstracts 3:  p0.72
paper contains a narrative overview of the past 20 years of environmental research on anomalous experiences attributed to “haunted house.” This exercise served as a much needed update to an anthology of noteworthy overviews on ghosts, haunts, and poltergeists . We also considered whether new studies had incorporated certain recommendations made in this anthology. Our search revealed a relative paucity of studies on environmental factors that ostensibly stimulate haunt type experiences. This literature was diverse and often lacked methodological consistency and adherence to the prior suggestions. However, critical consideration of 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p0
experiences. This literature was diverse and often lacked methodological consistency and adherence to the prior suggestions. However, critical consideration of the content revealed a recurring focus on six ambient variables: embedded (static) cues, lighting levels, air quality, temperature, infrasound, and electromagnetic fields. Their relation to the onset or structure of witness reports showed mostly null, though sometimes inconsistent or weak outcomes. However, such research as related to haunts is arguably in its infancy and new designs are needed to account better for environmental and architectural phenomenology. Future studies should therefore address four areas: (i) more consistent and precise measurements of discrete 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p0.24
for environmental and architectural phenomenology. Future studies should therefore address four areas: (i) more consistent and precise measurements of discrete ambient variables; (ii) the potential role of “Gestalt influences” that involve holistic environmentperson interactions; (iii) individual differences in attentional or perceptual sensitivities of percipients to environmental variables; and (iv) the role of attitudinal and normative influences in the interpretation of environmental stimuli. Focused scrutiny on these issues should clarify the explanatory power of evolutionary environmental models for these and related anomalous experiences. Keywords: ghost, haunt, anomalous experiences, environmental sensitivities, phenomenology INTRODUCTION It might sound like an amusing or curious claim, 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p0.52
anomalous experiences. Keywords: ghost, haunt, anomalous experiences, environmental sensitivities, phenomenology INTRODUCTION It might sound like an amusing or curious claim, but “haunted houses” could be among the oldest problems in environmental psychology, i.e., the scientific study of the transactions and interrelationships between people and their surroundings . In this context, anthropologists note that haunt experiences have been important aspects of shamanism in both early and contemporary societies For instance, “shaking tent” rituals involved a special cylindrical lodge or tent to contact “spirits” for guidance on hunting, healing, and even locating missing persons. And as the name of the ritual suggests, the 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p0.79
“spirits” for guidance on hunting, healing, and even locating missing persons. And as the name of the ritual suggests, the tent is supposed to tremble mysteriously during the ceremony. Moreman credited “the earliest haunted house story in Greek or Roman literature” to a 2,000 year old play by Plautus entitled “Mostellaria” (ca 200 This fictitious story reveals Roman beliefs about such phenomena which seemingly align well with modern presumptions .Haunt type experiences can also be found across many different societies and eras Still, it is important to note that the sociocultural milieu influences the interpretation of these anomalous episodes and the 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p1.03
eras Still, it is important to note that the sociocultural milieu influences the interpretation of these anomalous episodes and the ways people cope with them (for discussions, see Houran, 2004; Haunted Houses as Social Facts: : :and Possibly More The term “haunted house” references two types of ostensibly anomalous episodes, which we will examine from a phenomenological perspective First, “poltergeist disturbances” can be described as clusters of unusual experiences sensed presences, hearing voices, and unusual somatic or emotional manifestations) and physical events appearing to move by themselves, malfunctioning electrical or mechanical equipment, and inexplicable percussive sounds such as raps or 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p1.13
physical events appearing to move by themselves, malfunctioning electrical or mechanical equipment, and inexplicable percussive sounds such as raps or knocks), which focus around certain people Similar anomalies that persist at specific locations are said to constitute a second classification, “haunts” or “hauntings” However, a firm distinction between these two types of occurrences is tenuous due to their overlapping characteristics and shared set of psychological and physical anomalies that conform to a unidimensional and probabilistic (Rasch) hierarchy Thus, a common source or set of mechanisms might underlie both kinds of episodes. Skeptical readers should not trivialize these anomalous experiences because they 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p1.23
or set of mechanisms might underlie both kinds of episodes. Skeptical readers should not trivialize these anomalous experiences because they can affect several facets of people’s lives. Fundamentally, belief in ghosts informs an individual’s religio cultural worldview One journalist detailed an interesting and practical example of this during the COVID 19 pandemic . These beliefs likewise have implications for social identity theories of social rank, self esteem, and the belief systems that individuals hold for explanatory meaning in their lives Reports of ghosts and haunts may also reinforce or contextualize the anxieties of individuals who are already fearful of the paranormal 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p1.33
of ghosts and haunts may also reinforce or contextualize the anxieties of individuals who are already fearful of the paranormal de Oliveira The influence of haunt type episodes is clearly widespread. Gallup polls from 1990, 2001, and 2005 showed that a substantial proportion of respondents believe in ghosts and hauntings . The 2005 Gallup poll found that 37% of those surveyed believed that houses could be haunted, with 32% stating that the spirits of deceased people could return to certain places or situations . Other surveys have reported similar or even higher figures Particularly, Chapman University Survey of American Fears 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p1.44
places or situations . Other surveys have reported similar or even higher figures Particularly, Chapman University Survey of American Fears documented from 2016 to 2018 an 11% rise in respondents who “agree” or “strongly agree” with the statement: “Places can be haunted by spirits.” The percentage for 2018 (the last time the survey was conducted) was an astounding 58%. Likewise, a YouGov study reported that 45% of Americans polled believe that ghosts “definitely” or “probably” exist. Such beliefs can also spur various social consequences. For instance, the ghostly reputations of certain places have sometimes provoked real estate lawsuits concerning undisclosed “stigmatized 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p1.54
various social consequences. For instance, the ghostly reputations of certain places have sometimes provoked real estate lawsuits concerning undisclosed “stigmatized properties” . In fact, houses rumored to be haunted often suffer significant value diminution, and this is especially true in countries such as Taiwan and Hong Kong (China) where haunts have strong cultural associations with bad luck, vengeful ghosts, and ancestral spirit anger On the other hand, “haunted” buildings or sites in Western culture are often promoted favorably as tourist destinations Sales of these places can bring high prices if a paranormal reputation is regarded as a benefit by buyers . 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p1.64
Sales of these places can bring high prices if a paranormal reputation is regarded as a benefit by buyers . Hill et al. further discussed how entire industries have developed around “legend tripping,” i.e., deliberately visiting spooky locations to seek paranormal experiences (cf. Bird, 2002; as well as virtual excursions pursued via livestreamed videos . Folklorists might regard such pursuits as examples of “ostension,” which is showing or acting out a legend’s narrative in real life . These trends relate to broader issues, such as Maddern and Adey concept of spectro geographies. Edensor echoed this perspective in asserting that “ghosts 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p1.74
to broader issues, such as Maddern and Adey concept of spectro geographies. Edensor echoed this perspective in asserting that “ghosts ‘are a ubiquitous aspect of the phenomenology of place,’ ‘ineffable and quasi mystical’ dimensions which emerge in encounters with the material, the mediated, the sensual and the affectual” . As such, spectral themes frequently appear in the popular media and academic literature. All of this serves to promote ghosts and haunted houses as pervasive cultural narratives which can become highly engaging memes Overall, haunted houses exist as psychological, cultural, economic, and legal realities — with a strong and engaging “brand personality” 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p1.85
memes Overall, haunted houses exist as psychological, cultural, economic, and legal realities — with a strong and engaging “brand personality” akin to popular consumer products Although witness accounts are often explained away as instances of gullibility, overactive imaginations, or outright fraud , researchers have occasionally documented the presence of independent environmental or physical mechanisms in spontaneous cases The ontological status of these anomalous episodes beyond that of social facts thus remains a legitimate question. Consistent with this perspective, our paper evaluates the broad explanatory power of environmental psychology for haunt type experiences. The Present Review This paper extends Houran and Lange 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p1.95
the broad explanatory power of environmental psychology for haunt type experiences. The Present Review This paper extends Houran and Lange noteworthy series of peer reviewed and multidisciplinary research overviews on “ghostly episodes” (i.e., ghosts, haunts, and poltergeists) by focusing on subsequent academic work related to environmental factors. This update is needed as researchers have published an array of relevant articles over the past two decades. To be sure, it is good practice to perform a periodic synthesis of subject knowledge accruing from the rapid rate of publications as well as to collate and share key research on a topic . 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p2.05
accruing from the rapid rate of publications as well as to collate and share key research on a topic . We also checked whether methodological recommendations made by several authors in the anthology benefitted subsequent research. These recommendations called for (i) more holistic studies that simultaneously consider and measure a range of potential physical factors in haunted environments , (ii) the use of proper control conditions to understand the naturally occurring presence (or expected fluctuations) of physical variables as compared to haunted locations and (iii) extensive or competitive hypothesis testing involving cooperation between skeptics and parapsychologists . Critical consideration of the 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p2.15
haunted locations and (iii) extensive or competitive hypothesis testing involving cooperation between skeptics and parapsychologists . Critical consideration of the effectiveness of these refinements is vital to advance a scientific understanding of haunt type experiences (for a Consequently, we conducted a non systematic or narrative overview to identify, assess, and synthesize the relevant literature . This was done in preference to a systematic review for several reasons (cf. Green et al., 2006; Gregory Our goal was to identify important research rather than all articles produced within the specified period. Hence, our analysis focused on significant indicative research, intending neither to 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p2.25
rather than all articles produced within the specified period. Hence, our analysis focused on significant indicative research, intending neither to be exhaustive nor definitive. This methodology is potentially open to bias, but the use of specific research terms ensured that the studies assessed were thematically congruent with the topic of environmental factors in haunt type experiences. We explicitly provide an overview of the relevant research area and evaluate the current status of the topic but note that a detailed critique of each identified study is not necessarily a property of this approach (cf. Helewa A systematic review, in contrast, locates all 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p2.35
each identified study is not necessarily a property of this approach (cf. Helewa A systematic review, in contrast, locates all relevant published and unpublished studies with the intention of assessing publication impact and identifying bias. A systematic review also tests specific hypotheses or examines the impact of specific populations, outcomes, etc. . Commensurate with our stated aims, meta analysis was deemed not appropriate. Meta analysis is a quantitative, formal study design used to systematically assess the results of previous research in order to derive conclusions about that literature (see However, several issues argue against the use of meta analysis here. Recent 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p2.45
order to derive conclusions about that literature (see However, several issues argue against the use of meta analysis here. Recent research shows that at least five compatible studies are needed to sufficiently overcome between study error variance . On this point, crucial disparities exist among the research methods and contexts in the literature that we sourced. These differences are substantial; they include purely field versus laboratory physical readings and, in some instances, a lack of either. Moreover, in many instances the physical aspect of what was being assessed sometimes infrasound) are not convertible to a standard metric given the information 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p2.56
the physical aspect of what was being assessed sometimes infrasound) are not convertible to a standard metric given the information provided by the studies. A meta analysis, therefore, could produce inaccurate results and interpretations. Also, despite their popularity, meta analytic techniques are not without criticism Regardless of the method employed, a sound review is characterized by rigorous evaluation and critical analysis of relevant academic work . METHOD We reviewed conceptual and empirical research on “ghostly episodes” from environmental perspectives that was published primarily since the evaluations in Houran and Lange . We targeted studies using eighteen keywords or phrases frequently used 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p2.66
published primarily since the evaluations in Houran and Lange . We targeted studies using eighteen keywords or phrases frequently used in research examining haunt type experiences: anomalous experience, apparition, demon, ego alien intrusions, encounter experiences, ghost, ghost hunting, haunt, haunting, metachoric experience, paranormal belief, paranormal experience, poltergeist, possession, séance, sensed presence, sitter group work, and spirit. Our search was limited to publications written in English. The procedure covered electronic search engines and repositories Google Scholar, PsycINFO, and ResearchGate), and examination of titles, abstracts, reference lists, and publications. Finally, we included studies cited in the sourced works. This process yielded 66 articles. 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p2.76
titles, abstracts, reference lists, and publications. Finally, we included studies cited in the sourced works. This process yielded 66 articles. Of these, 55% appeared in parapsychology journals or niche sources versus 45% in mainstream journals or sources. The distribution appears reasonably balanced from an ideological standpoint, but this literature set averages just three articles per year. This implies slow and limited progress in examining the role of environmental factors in haunttype episodes. RESULTS Six environmental variables emerged from our qualitative inspection of the identified literature: (i) embedded (static) cues; (ii) lighting levels; (iii) air quality; (iv) temperature; (v) infrasound; and 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p2.86
inspection of the identified literature: (i) embedded (static) cues; (ii) lighting levels; (iii) air quality; (iv) temperature; (v) infrasound; and (vi) electromagnetic fields. Study authors often characterized these factors as either conscious or unconscious stimulants of anomalous experiences. Conscious stimulants are variables that can overtly capture attention and be interpreted as ghostly. Unconscious (or non conscious) stimulants refer to elements that are unwittingly or passively sensed and can stimulate unusual or anomalous perceptions. Note that some variables might act as either type of stimulant. Embedded (Physical or Static) Cues in the Environment Content or thematic analyses of haunt narratives have suggested 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p2.96
type of stimulant. Embedded (Physical or Static) Cues in the Environment Content or thematic analyses of haunt narratives have suggested that the perceptual details of percipients’ experiences are often congruent with contextual variables attending the situation or location . These “context effects” include tangible embedded cues in the physical environment, such as the mysterious aroma of lilacs in a room with a prominent violet hue or the mysterious sound of waltz music in an empty ballroom. Unfortunately, few ecologically valid studies have empirically tested the premise that haunt experiences might involve such cues. There are two notable exceptions. First, Houran examined 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p3.05
have empirically tested the premise that haunt experiences might involve such cues. There are two notable exceptions. First, Houran examined the real time anomalous experiences of research participants in tandem with salient environmental and aesthetic characteristics of haunted vs non haunted rooms in a historic mansion with a quiet reputation for paranormal activity. For instance, certain locations were associated with reports of a sensed presence. These accounts correlated with rooms containing the most artwork conceivably created a sense that participants were literally being watched). Nonetheless, analysis found no statistically significant differences between the haunted and non haunted areas based on 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p3.15
were literally being watched). Nonetheless, analysis found no statistically significant differences between the haunted and non haunted areas based on the number of pieces of artwork (specifically paintings and sculptures), or the ambient temperature, humidity, or the number of air vents in each room. Consequently, there was no evidence that these environmental features acted as contextual variables to stimulate or shape participants’ experiences. Terhune et al. improved on this basic procedure in their field investigation of a reputed haunt (an unpublicized private residence) in comparison to a nearby control house. These researchers measured physical cues such as windows, mirrors, and the 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p3.24
private residence) in comparison to a nearby control house. These researchers measured physical cues such as windows, mirrors, and the quantity and type of artwork (with and without human forms) using a research design that encompassed (i) potential differences between the target and control houses; and (ii) potential differences within haunted and non haunted areas of the target house. These physical cues were also examined in relation to the presence of apparent photographic anomalies obtained across different film media during the study and rated by independent judges. Similar to Houran , no statistically significant effects were found for the environmental variables. 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p3.33
study and rated by independent judges. Similar to Houran , no statistically significant effects were found for the environmental variables. However, there was a suggestive trend (p < 0.07, two tailed) for the control house to contain more mirrors than the target house . This finding might seem surprising and counterintuitive, since mirrors and reflective surfaces in general are associated with anomalous experiences This correlation offers several interpretations. Mirrors might, for example, serve as embedded (physical) cues that reinforce expectancy or suggestion effects. However, this possibility must be balanced against the evidence indicating that reflective surfaces can directly stimulate perceptual 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p3.42
or suggestion effects. However, this possibility must be balanced against the evidence indicating that reflective surfaces can directly stimulate perceptual aberrations, independently of suggestion . Indeed, unusual or anomalous perceptions (in different sensory modalities) predictably and systematically manifest when even healthy clinical) individuals are directed to stare intently into a mirror, darkened space, or another person’s face over a period of time and under low illumination . Psychomanteum, mirror gazing, and eye gazing protocols that are used to study these perceptual phenomena constitute a fascinating niche within consciousness studies and can aid model building or theory formation of haunttype experiences . 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p3.52
phenomena constitute a fascinating niche within consciousness studies and can aid model building or theory formation of haunttype experiences . Caputo proposed three distinct clusters (or factors) of anomalous experience that derive from different brain circuits stimulated during such facilitated sessions. He validated his idea with a questionnaire study that assessed the strength and frequency of a large list of apparitional and anomalous phenomena. This list generally aligned with Baker definition of apparitions, which itself was adapted from Thalbourne glossary: “A sensory experience in which there appears to be present a person or animal (deceased or living) who is in 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p3.61
“A sensory experience in which there appears to be present a person or animal (deceased or living) who is in fact out of sensory range of the experient: : :” . A principal component analysis and quartimax rotation suggested that anomalous experiences during mirror and eyegazing sessions form three independent factors . This same three factor structure was confirmed via other methods (e.g., polychoric, alpha), suggesting that the perceptual anomalies derive from three distinct states of consciousness: (i) depersonalization bodily self, hence out of body presence); (ii) derealization changes in sensory maps of visual processing, hence deformations in perceptions); and (iii) 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p3.7
hence out of body presence); (ii) derealization changes in sensory maps of visual processing, hence deformations in perceptions); and (iii) dissociated identity self concept, thus apparitions of strange personalities in place of the subject’s real face reflected in the mirror). The balance among these three processing levels apparently varies among observers . Lighting Levels Illumination is an understudied topic in the relevant literature. Settings with low light appear to be normal operating procedure in many field investigations not to mention spiritualistic practice Moreover, the horror film genre is an obvious example of darkness being used as a “theatrical artifice” to reinforce 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p3.79
practice Moreover, the horror film genre is an obvious example of darkness being used as a “theatrical artifice” to reinforce conditions of spookiness or creepiness. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that darker settings bolster the expectancy set of percipients. Of the few studies that have directly examined lighting in relation to haunts, Terhune et al. found that overall lighting levels were not significantly different in an allegedly haunted site compared to a control site. Yet, examination of the means and standard deviations do show lower mean levels of lighting and much less variability at the haunted location, indicating an 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p3.89
and standard deviations do show lower mean levels of lighting and much less variability at the haunted location, indicating an overall lower level of lighting (albeit non significant). A serious limitation in this study was that measurements were not made simultaneous with real time reports of anomalous experiences. In contrast, Wiseman et al. measured the lighting levels both inside and directly outside the test areas of the haunted South Bridge Vaults (Edinburgh, Scotland). These researchers found a significant association between the lighting outside of target areas and anomalous reports of participants, as well as with those areas with a history of 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p3.98
lighting outside of target areas and anomalous reports of participants, as well as with those areas with a history of ghostly reports. Nevertheless, “lighting levels” could be the wrong attribution for these findings if the absence of light or sensory deprivation is instead the principal effect. An oft used explanation for ghostly anomalies as a function of darkness is visual pareidolia, or the tendency to make or perceive meaningful patterns in visual noise . Nees and Phillips similarly argued that auditory pareodolia accounted for so called “electronic voice phenomena” (EVP) and related experiences in some haunt episodes. Evidence supports this model, 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p4.07
pareodolia accounted for so called “electronic voice phenomena” (EVP) and related experiences in some haunt episodes. Evidence supports this model, although it typically derives from research with patients suffering from psychosis or disorders such as dementia. For instance, Mamiya et al. standardized a short form visual pareidolia test for use with dementia patients, which correlated positively with separate measures of pareidolia. This test provides a series of white noise and blurred image pictures for participants to interpret. Notably, they do not measure low lighting images, but earlier work using this procedure showed a significant increase in pareidolia hallucinations with dementia 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p4.16
not measure low lighting images, but earlier work using this procedure showed a significant increase in pareidolia hallucinations with dementia patients versus controls. Unfortunately, the populations and methodologies in these studies undermine the generalizability of their findings for nonclinical samples or haunt related contexts. More closely related to the dark bowers of a haunted location are Daniel and Mason sensory deprivation studies. These researchers placed participants (scoring either low or high on psychoticlike experience) in a sensory deprivation chamber for sound and light. Both the low and high scoring groups reported a significant increase in psychotic like experiences, which did not 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p4.24
and light. Both the low and high scoring groups reported a significant increase in psychotic like experiences, which did not appear to be a function of either suggestibility or fantasy proneness. Overall, lighting level seems a likely contributor to experiences deemed paranormal or ghostly. However, we note that light anomalies or other curious “artifacts” captured on film or video Schwartz and Creath, 2005; Laythe and Owen, 2013; Mayer, or measured outside the visible light spectrum are not, strictly speaking, accounted for by pareidolia like effects. Relative to the former,Wilson et al. demonstrated transient decreases in both infrared and visible light during 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p4.33
by pareidolia like effects. Relative to the former,Wilson et al. demonstrated transient decreases in both infrared and visible light during environmental measurement of a single séance session of approximately 95 minutes. Further studies are needed to account for low light pareidolia phenomena, while controlling for other environmental factors in haunt related settings Air Quality Government agencies describe the general cleanliness of the air and potentially associated health effects via the Air Quality Index . Five major air pollutants are regulated by the Clean Air Act in the United States: (i) ground level ozone; (ii) particle pollution (e.g., acids, such as 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p4.42
by the Clean Air Act in the United States: (i) ground level ozone; (ii) particle pollution (e.g., acids, such as nitrates and sulfates); organic chemicals, metals, soil or dust particles, and allergens (e.g., fragments of pollen or mold spores); (iii) carbon monoxide; (iv) sulfur dioxide; and (v) nitrogen dioxide. For each of these, the Environmental Protection Agency has established national air quality standards and calculates the AQI to protect public health. Of the above categories, we found only references to particle pollution and carbon monoxide in the haunt literature. For instance, humidity or water vapor is a contributor to mold growth 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p4.51
pollution and carbon monoxide in the haunt literature. For instance, humidity or water vapor is a contributor to mold growth . Numerous articles have bolstered public awareness of the acute and chronic illnesses that can result from exposure to biotoxins made by molds, dinoflagellates, spirochetes, and blue green algae . The ensuing symptoms sometimes parallel the psychological experiences that characterize haunts, e.g., disorientation, mood swings, temperature regulation problems, and tingling (cf. Since many haunted locations are older structures that are prime candidates for mold or other indoor air quality problems, some authors have proposed that ghostly experiences are indicative of exposure 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p4.59
candidates for mold or other indoor air quality problems, some authors have proposed that ghostly experiences are indicative of exposure to toxic molds. To our knowledge, this speculation has yet to be validated by research showing differences in indoor air contamination between haunted and control locations. Furthermore, the available evidence is not persuasive that haunts are even indirectly related to humidity levels (or mold growth). Terhune et al. study of a target house and control house revealed significantly higher humidity levels in the target house, but there was no statistically significant difference in humidity levels between haunted versus non haunted 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p4.68
levels in the target house, but there was no statistically significant difference in humidity levels between haunted versus non haunted rooms of the target house. There were likewise no significant differences in humidity levels (or the number of air vents) in Houran investigation of haunted and non haunted rooms at a historic mansion. Broadly speaking, the relevant literature has omitted the measurement of humidity. This is not to say that pertinent findings are completely absent. To be sure, “It’s not the heat, it’s the humidity” is an old adage with some empirical support. For instance, Ding et al. found that humidity 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p4.77
heat, it’s the humidity” is an old adage with some empirical support. For instance, Ding et al. found that humidity significantly compounds the negative association between hot weather and mental health, demonstrating a.01% to.05% increase in negative mental health effects based on logit model prediction of heat and humidity. Still, the contribution of humidity to mental health appears to be small. Conversely, the role of carbon monoxide has been clearly substantiated in a few reports. Perhaps most famously, Wilmer published a dramatic case study of a couple who moved into a “large, rambling, high studded house, built around 1870, and 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p4.86
a dramatic case study of a couple who moved into a “large, rambling, high studded house, built around 1870, and much out of repair.” The pair soon began having anomalous experiences encompassing unusual bouts of headaches, strange sensations, feelings of listlessness, hearing phantom footsteps, and seeing mysterious figures. Their complaints closely matched the classic signs or symptoms of a haunt , but these were eventually traced to carbon monoxide poisoning from a faulty furnace. According to The Body Odd , a much more recent case involved a woman who was found delirious and hyperventilating after seeing a ghost while taking a 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p4.94
much more recent case involved a woman who was found delirious and hyperventilating after seeing a ghost while taking a shower. Investigators discovered a new gas water heater had been improperly installed and thus flooded the house with carbon monoxide. Beyond those two examples (including only one citation within our literature set), the available evidence does not implicate carbon monoxide poisoning in witness reports. Telling in this respect is that Joe Nickell, a well known skeptic and researcher of paranormal claims, stated that he has “: : :never encountered this scenario” . Temperature Ghostly episodes can, but rarely, involve reports of 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p5.03
stated that he has “: : :never encountered this scenario” . Temperature Ghostly episodes can, but rarely, involve reports of an increase in temperature . For example, Nickell discussed one account in which a phantom silhouette was reported by a naval captain in an unbearably hot bedroom. The most often reported temperature anomalies in haunt type experiences, however, are so called cold spots, i.e., a distinct perception of localized coldness . Williams et al. online primer for paranormal enthusiasts noted that the duration of cold spots can range from a “fleeting feeling, or they may be persistent over time” . 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p5.12
that the duration of cold spots can range from a “fleeting feeling, or they may be persistent over time” . Parapsychologists acknowledge that these subjective temperature drops or changes at haunts may stem from the predictable physiological reaction to fear in a purportedly haunted space . Still, there is a paucity of laboratory research to verify the hypothesized causes of temperature anomalies. Some experimental work on related anomalous experiences includes reports of temperature drops, such as with séance room phenomena . O’Keeffe and Parsons critically discussed one of the few studies in the last 25 years — conducted by Radin and 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p5.21
O’Keeffe and Parsons critically discussed one of the few studies in the last 25 years — conducted by Radin and Rebman — that tested the correlation between temperature changes in the immediate environment and participants’ mental states (albeit via the induction of an anomalous experience). The study’s protocol involved an instrumented psychomanteum chamber: a small and dimly lit room with a mirror strategically placed to induce experiences of after death communication . O’Keeffe and Parsons noted that “some of the significant ambient temperature and physiological correlations were possible artifacts of a common downward drift in temperature” exacerbated by the floor level 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p5.31
ambient temperature and physiological correlations were possible artifacts of a common downward drift in temperature” exacerbated by the floor level placement of the computerized thermometer. Terhune et al. extensive field study of an allegedly haunted residence found that ambient temperature was significantly colder compared to a nearby designated control house, even when possible confounds were considered number of windows). However, there was little difference within the haunted house itself, i.e., no relationship between areas associated with anomalous experiences and temperature readings. Similarly, a series of field experiments conducted at Hampton Court Palace and the Edinburgh Vaults to examine psychological mechanisms 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p5.4
readings. Similarly, a series of field experiments conducted at Hampton Court Palace and the Edinburgh Vaults to examine psychological mechanisms that might underlie participants’ haunt experiences also accumulated a wealth of data on environmental variables The researchers found no significant relationship between temperature and the number of anomalous experiences that research participants reported . Infrasound Leventhall et al. defined infrasound as audio frequency energy that falls below the range of normal hearing, typically 20Hz. It can be characterized simplistically as a hum you cannot hear. Persinger noted the prevalence of both ambient infrasound within the environment (via natural phenomena such as 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p5.49
hum you cannot hear. Persinger noted the prevalence of both ambient infrasound within the environment (via natural phenomena such as geomagnetic activity, wind, etc.) and manmade infrasound in duct systems). The vibroacoustic effect of a wide spectrum of low frequency sound within a paranormal context has been argued from a physics perspective in two key articles . In these papers, Vinokur described how naturally occurring vibroacoustic phenomena can produce poltergeist type effects (rattling windows, whispering galleries, etc.). We note that the proposed role of infrasound in haunt type experiences dates a decade earlier to the research of Tandy and Lawrence . 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p5.58
proposed role of infrasound in haunt type experiences dates a decade earlier to the research of Tandy and Lawrence . They posited a causal link between infrasound and apparitional experiences specifically noting that infrasound around 19 Hz appeared to cause visual effects derived from eyeball vibration that might be interpreted as a ghostly sighting. This basic hypothesis was tested a few years later in a study of ambient infrasound in a reputedly haunted 14th century cellar beneath a tourist information centre in Coventry Parsons , however, conducted a series of infrasound measurements at the same venue in 2006. His findings 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p5.67
centre in Coventry Parsons , however, conducted a series of infrasound measurements at the same venue in 2006. His findings did not support those of Tandy but instead implicated a “broad range of frequencies exceeding 30 dBS between 20 Hz and 2 HZ, with a peak at 44 dBS at 5.7 Hz” . Authorities have further voiced two major concerns about Tandy’s work : first, the lack of detail provided about the infrasound measurements themselves (weighting filter unspecified, room dimensions not taken into and second, the lack of evidence demonstrating the physiological effects of such weak infrasound levels . These criticisms 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p5.76
taken into and second, the lack of evidence demonstrating the physiological effects of such weak infrasound levels . These criticisms challenge the relevance of infrasound to haunt type experiences. Field studies of haunts across the United Kingdom led by Parsons et al. , Parsons , Parsons and Cooper , on the other hand, concluded that high ambient levels of infrasound (at varying frequencies) did contribute to witness accounts. That said, these findings did not support Tandy and Lawrence hypothesis that infrasound near 19Hz induces visual disturbances that are intepreted as apparitional experiences. Nevertheless, similarities exist between the physical and psychological effects 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p5.85
near 19Hz induces visual disturbances that are intepreted as apparitional experiences. Nevertheless, similarities exist between the physical and psychological effects of infrasound documented in the lab and those reported anecdotally by witnesses in haunt cases Participants in recent studies of pure infrasound tones at high sound pressure levels have reported effects such as headaches, ear pressure, tiredness, change in heart rate, disorientation, and complications arising from the impact on the inner ear . Furthermore, Tandy and Lawrence original hypothesis has been re examined in a series of unusual and highly public studies conducted since 2001. Music concerts that incorporated man 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p5.94
been re examined in a series of unusual and highly public studies conducted since 2001. Music concerts that incorporated man made infrasound were held at a venue in Liverpool and again at the Royal Festival Hall in London In a pre specified number of pieces during the concert, infrasound was added and the audience’s emotional response to the music correspondingly measured. Although the environment and social context may have played a role in the way the audience reacted to the music, counter balancing of the infrasound presence over two performances controlled some of this influence. In addition to questionnaire based data, 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p6.03
counter balancing of the infrasound presence over two performances controlled some of this influence. In addition to questionnaire based data, free response sections provided a rich source for more qualitative information. Reactions ranged from low arousal reports like “calm” and “sleepy” to more active states such as “aroused” and “excited.” These accounts reflected experiences that varied in intensity from slight agitation or light headedness to the more noticeable, e.g., increased heartbeat, facial tingle, and a marked sense of presence . A similar approach to infrasound generating and testing was used in two further public performances in 2006 and 2010, whereby 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p6.12
A similar approach to infrasound generating and testing was used in two further public performances in 2006 and 2010, whereby the focus was on infrasound at 18.9Hz at a sound pressure level exceeding 90DBs Reactions noted by audience members included distinct physical discomfort and anxiety, yet it is unclear whether these responses were due to the generated infrasound, the ambient infrasound already present, or other environmental variables that factored into the performance (e.g., subliminal suggestion) . A novel test of Tandy’s hypothesis involved the construction of a “completely empty, white, and circular room” that became “haunted” through the systematic variation of 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p6.21
hypothesis involved the construction of a “completely empty, white, and circular room” that became “haunted” through the systematic variation of two key factors: electromagnetic fields and infrasound In this so called Haunt Project, participants were informed in advance that they might be exposed to varying EMFs, infrasound, both or neither, and that they might experience mildly unusual sensations as a result . The participants spent nearly an hour wandering around the specially constructed room and were asked to record their impressions and experiences. Participants reported many unusual or anomalous perceptions, but the frequency was unrelated to the environmental manipulations. The researchers 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p6.3
and experiences. Participants reported many unusual or anomalous perceptions, but the frequency was unrelated to the environmental manipulations. The researchers therefore proposed that expectancy or suggestion effects accounted for the participants’ experiences . We should qualify that the apparent suggestion effects in this experiment might not have been independent of some confounding physical influences. Particularly, French et al. stated that “Informal pilot testing had suggested that dim illumination and a cool temperature would be the most suitable conditions for this study, insofar as they are the conditions typically associated with reputedly haunted locations” . Furthermore, Parsons and Cooper were critical 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p6.38
study, insofar as they are the conditions typically associated with reputedly haunted locations” . Furthermore, Parsons and Cooper were critical of the general results, raising concerns about the production of infrasound , the lack of detail regarding the sound recording equipment, and the absence of ambient infrasound data. Electromagnetic Fields (EMFs) If the public associates anything that is “scientific” with haunttype experiences, it is the apparent role of EMFs Indeed, it can be argued that the majority of findings from fieldwork studies of haunts relate to EMF effects . Interested readers are encouraged to consult important discussions of this topic for 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p6.47
studies of haunts relate to EMF effects . Interested readers are encouraged to consult important discussions of this topic for insight into the technicalities involved and corresponding debates concerning the issues of measurement and interpretation of research findings (see Persinger and Koren, 2001b;Williams et al., As basic background, geomagnetic fields (GMF) are DC fields that are largely generated through the fluid motion of the Earth’s molten iron core . Although the GMF of the Earth averages around 500 milliGauss (MG), and is typically less than 10 Hz, several variables can produce notable changes in GMF strength around the globe. These include 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p6.56
is typically less than 10 Hz, several variables can produce notable changes in GMF strength around the globe. These include seismic activity along fault zones , electrical activity during thunderstorms, and large amounts of magnetic or electrically conductive minerals present in the geology of a given area. In addition, increases in cosmic radiation – e.g., from sunspots, solar flares, or similar phenomena –can sometimes greatly change GMF strength and lead to geomagnetic storms as this radiation interacts with the boundary of the GMF in the upper atmosphere . In contrast, electromagnetic fields are AC fields that are usually produced artificially 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p6.65
of the GMF in the upper atmosphere . In contrast, electromagnetic fields are AC fields that are usually produced artificially by electrical power currents, though in some instances, EM fields are produced naturally by geophysical sources. For instance, electricity can be produced through seismic pressure acting on conductive rock along fault zones , as well as by very low frequency atmospherics, i.e., electromagnetic pulses produced from electrical discharges after a lightning strike averaging around 0.6 MG . GMF and EMF are both phenomena associated with the electromagnetic spectrum at its slowest frequencies. Whereas GMF resides in the single digits frequencies, EMF 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p6.74
both phenomena associated with the electromagnetic spectrum at its slowest frequencies. Whereas GMF resides in the single digits frequencies, EMF is typically shorthand for mains frequency (i.e. power lines) magnetic fields produced at either 60 or 50Hz, depending on your country of origin. Nowhere are the issues of technology and measurement more problematic than with EMFs particularly in the stark contrast between laboratory designs and field measurements. Studies examining EMFrelationships have been published sporadically for years, but considerable variations in methods and ontological assumptions have made it difficult to compare and contrast study outcomes and implications. Foremost among these issues are 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p6.83
and ontological assumptions have made it difficult to compare and contrast study outcomes and implications. Foremost among these issues are incorrect assumptions about EMF behavior in natural settings. Laythe et al. have emphasized that EMFs are subject to rapidly declining strength as a function of distance, which implies an exponential decay rate . Thus, power lines or electrical towers have been erroneously blamed for EMF findings when actually these structures can be relatively close and not affect the EMF levels of nearby environments. Similarly, most of the magnetic force of artificially produced EMF is diminished as a function of radio 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p6.92
of nearby environments. Similarly, most of the magnetic force of artificially produced EMF is diminished as a function of radio and broadcasting data . Further, triangulation is rarely used with EMF in the field, which makes detection of the precise source of EMFs nearly impossible. Finally, the technology of EMF meters is receptive, meaning these have a limited capacity to detect EMF fields (which decay quickly). Readings can consequently be significantly altered by moving an EMF meter by two or three feet . These statements are neither meant to imply that EMFs do not generally affect environmental systems, nor that geophysical 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p7
feet . These statements are neither meant to imply that EMFs do not generally affect environmental systems, nor that geophysical effects do not necessarily influence “haunted” environments. We conclude only that the methods of EMF data collection in the field have inhibited effective cross study comparisons. For example, some evidence suggests that sleep disturbances, mood shifts, and increases in anxiety can coincide with changes in geomagnetic field activity . Other studies suggest that people with particularly sensitive temporal lobes (a condition that may be caused by temporal lobe epilepsy or brain injury), may be more susceptible to changes in GMF activity 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p7.09
that may be caused by temporal lobe epilepsy or brain injury), may be more susceptible to changes in GMF activity Correlational research suggests that geomagnetic activity may be stronger on days when people report bereavement hallucinations died) . Strong geomagnetic fields, around 200 MG or more above the average for the Earth’s GMF, have been documented at reputed haunts . It is important to note, however, that all these studies assume that within the mix of EMF magnitude (i.e., field strength), a persistent frequency exists that corresponds to the precise frequency needed to produce a sensed presence or related hallucinatory 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p7.18
strength), a persistent frequency exists that corresponds to the precise frequency needed to produce a sensed presence or related hallucinatory type phenomena. Some experimental evidence also raises concern over the potential effects of EMF exposure on mental health . For example, two studies have observed possible changes in brain wave activity on an electroencephalogram (EEG) following two second exposure to EMFs as strong as 780 MG (von Klitzing, 1991; Bell et al., Persinger et al. found changes in brain waves when lower strength magnetic fields (10 MG) were applied over several minutes, and these changes persisted a short time after the 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p7.26
lower strength magnetic fields (10 MG) were applied over several minutes, and these changes persisted a short time after the magnetic stimulation ceased. A review of experimental studies also suggests that brain chemistry and hormone levels may sometimes change in response to EMF exposure . Some data also suggest that EMF exposure can also affect sleep , which might contribute to haunt experiences that occur during sleeping hours. Gangi and Johansson even proposed that EMF exposure can cause certain skin cells to release inflammatory substances that can cause itching and other skin sensations. Such physiological effects might relate to unusual 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p7.35
cells to release inflammatory substances that can cause itching and other skin sensations. Such physiological effects might relate to unusual somatic complaints reported in some haunt experiences EMF strength in buildings typically averages between 0.2 to 2 MG. Several field investigations of haunts have measured EMFs appreciably above this average Persinger et al., 2001; Roll and Persinger, 2001, pp. 154–163; In the laboratory, Persinger et al. studied the experiences of a man who had reported haunt phenomena in his home. When they applied a 10 MG EMF to his brain, the man reported experiencing brief rushes of fear and various odd 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p7.44
they applied a 10 MG EMF to his brain, the man reported experiencing brief rushes of fear and various odd sensations. This was followed by his perceiving a visual image that seemed to resemble the apparition he had remembered previously. Changes in brain wave activity were also measured via EEG in conjunction with his anomalous perception (for discussions of this and related work, see Persinger, 2001; Laboratory research also shows that anomalous impressions can be artificially induced by stimulating the brain with temporally complex, weak intensity magnetic fields Persinger, 2001; Persinger, 2001, Persinger, 2003; Persinger According to Persinger, anomalous perceptions are 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p7.53
with temporally complex, weak intensity magnetic fields Persinger, 2001; Persinger, 2001, Persinger, 2003; Persinger According to Persinger, anomalous perceptions are caused by temporally complex magnetic fields that induce partial microseizures (paroxysmal events) in temporal lobe regions and the deep sub cortical structures they house, such as the hippocampus and amygdala . Essentially, Persinger proposed that such micro seizures can cascade through the neural landscape and, with enough intensity, affect the individual’s thoughts, images, memories, and feelings, so that hallucinations, and anomalous perceptions result . His clear and testable prediction is that magnetic fields present at some reputed haunts can induce 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p7.61
anomalous perceptions result . His clear and testable prediction is that magnetic fields present at some reputed haunts can induce reports of sensed presences or other ghostly experiences However, this “Persinger effect” hallucinations) as a comprehensive explanation for haunted houses is insufficient for several reasons. First, it does not consider the low probability that all haunts exist at environments where a very specific and precisely patterned EMF wave can affect temporal lobe functioning. Braithwaite haunt investigations, for example, identified only two of approximately 50 sites with magnetic fields that were temporally complex. This incidence rate might be better described as “coincidental” 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p7.7
of approximately 50 sites with magnetic fields that were temporally complex. This incidence rate might be better described as “coincidental” than “rare.” Similarly, Laythe and Owen found highly varied EMF and GMF readings in a non powered, electrical environment. This suggests that ostensibly anomalous EMF/GMF is not stable over time. Thus, it remains to be seen whether the waveforms measured and detailed in these studies have any implications for human experience, even in contextually and experientially rich settings. Also notable is the fact that one particular study, while failing to replicate the Persinger effect, implicated the role of suggestion and prior 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p7.79
the fact that one particular study, while failing to replicate the Persinger effect, implicated the role of suggestion and prior belief . Persinger and Koren subsequently criticized Granqvist and colleagues by claiming that the fields used may not have been appropriate for eliciting a neurological response, possibly due to alterations in the temporal characteristics of the waveforms (for a reply, see Larsson Persinger’s argument implies that a high degree of temporal specificity is required to elicit the hypothesized effects. His earlier studies, employing an apparatus known as the “God Helmet” (where magnetic coils are strategically temporally placed) were, in fact, 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p7.87
earlier studies, employing an apparatus known as the “God Helmet” (where magnetic coils are strategically temporally placed) were, in fact, partially replicated by a team whose production of 10mG magnetic fields in the helmet resulted in participants reporting anomalous perceptions, including sensed presences . Persinger’s ideas presumably have limited applicability to most haunt sites since the requisite temporal complexity is unlikely to occur. We note, furthermore, that many studies have found no such effects. These include several field investigations and laboratory experiments Williams duly noted a lack of a historical relationship between reported haunts and manufactured EMFs. Cornell similarly pointed out 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p7.96
experiments Williams duly noted a lack of a historical relationship between reported haunts and manufactured EMFs. Cornell similarly pointed out that haunt accounts “: : :were widely reported long before the development and use of manmade electromagnetic utilities” . Still, several haunt investigations have documented EMF effects and found that the absolute strength or intensity of the magnetic fields might not be as important as their fluctuation over time. These studies have sought to quantify the magnetic fields at reputed haunts and compare them to appropriate baselines 2008; Braithwaite et al., 2004; Braithwaite and Townsend, 2005; In at least two field 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p8.05
and compare them to appropriate baselines 2008; Braithwaite et al., 2004; Braithwaite and Townsend, 2005; In at least two field investigations byWilliam G. Roll (reported in Roll and Persinger, the strength of the magnetic fields was found to be either gradually increasing or decreasing as one moved from one side of the haunted site to the other. During a study of haunt reports at historic Hampton Court Palace, Wiseman et al. noted that changes in the magnetic fields in areas of the palace associated with anomalous experiences differed significantly from the EMF changes in control areas in which no such 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p8.15
of the palace associated with anomalous experiences differed significantly from the EMF changes in control areas in which no such experiences were reported. Variance of the magnetic field correlated with the number of unusual experiences reported. Braithwaite and colleagues examined a specific bedroom at the historic Muncaster Castle on multiple occasions Witnesses sleeping in the room had reported hearing voices at night that resembled children crying. Braithwaite’s group took measurements around the head of the bed and then compared them to measurements taken toward the center of the room where the mysterious voices apparently originated. Notable changes in magnetic field strength 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p8.24
measurements taken toward the center of the room where the mysterious voices apparently originated. Notable changes in magnetic field strength were observed over this short distance of a few meters. Similarly, Terhune et al. found noteworthy differences when comparing the magnetic field changes in areas where haunt phenomena were reported with control areas that had no reported phenomena. Other researchers have suggested that the potential influence of magnetic fields might be greater if they exist within built environments that are ‘spooky’ dim lighting, or vintage paintings and furniture: Lange and Houran, 1997a; Houran, 2002; Braithwaite and Townsend, 2005; It might be 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p8.34
dim lighting, or vintage paintings and furniture: Lange and Houran, 1997a; Houran, 2002; Braithwaite and Townsend, 2005; It might be possible that such contextual variables work together with magnetic fields to stimulate expectation as well as neural arousal. Recent research further complicates the EMF haunted house relationship. Wilson et al. found changes in EMF during a séance session where light anomalies and rappings sounds occurred. Additionally, two detailed studies appear to show significant real time associations between EMFs and clearly physical (vs. imagined) anomalies In these latter studies, anomalous phenomena captured in audio or video recordings were shown to correlate 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p8.43
physical (vs. imagined) anomalies In these latter studies, anomalous phenomena captured in audio or video recordings were shown to correlate with significant micro expansion or suppression of the area’s EMF field during the time period of the documented anomalous event. Also, hourly correlations of EMF/GMF meters in the Laythe and Owen study varied wildly on an hourly basis in a location that was approximately a half mile from any confounding electrical sources. Further investigation by Laythe et al. in a laboratory séance setting found significant variability of EMF and GMF across sessions, and EMFspikes were significantly associated with participants’ anomalous experiences. 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p8.53
séance setting found significant variability of EMF and GMF across sessions, and EMFspikes were significantly associated with participants’ anomalous experiences. This suggests that micro expansion or microcontraction of EMF may be a significant factor in haunttype experiences. Laythe’s three studies above appear to challenge conventional physical explanations for the observed EMF effects. His work further undermines a hallucinatory EMF model as the sole explanation for haunt type experiences. Both Laythe and Owen and Laythe and Houran recorded objective anomalies (i.e., tangible and measurable) in tandem with significant EMF fluctuations. Given that EMF manifests as either a vector (a focused wave 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p8.62
tangible and measurable) in tandem with significant EMF fluctuations. Given that EMF manifests as either a vector (a focused wave with direction), or a general field with a source of origin, neither study could account for any EMF source that could theoretically create localized variability in the EMF field. Although these micro EMF expansion and suppression effects have been conceptually replicated three times in different environments, they require further independent validation. DISCUSSION Examination of the identified literature showed that the methodological recommendations put forward by previous authorities had not been consistently adopted by investigators. That is, few research designs considered either 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p8.72
recommendations put forward by previous authorities had not been consistently adopted by investigators. That is, few research designs considered either a range of environmental variables simultaneously, compared results from haunted locations to suitable control conditions, or applied extensive or competitive hypothesis testing using collaborations between investigators with ideological differences. Researchers instead tended to pinpoint several conventional factors that can theoretically impact, though perhaps subtly or unwittingly, the psychological experience of natural and built environments. Yet, this target literature offered neither abundantly clear, nor persuasive evidence for most of these ostensible unconscious or conscious stimulants as a robust model for haunted houses. 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p8.81
clear, nor persuasive evidence for most of these ostensible unconscious or conscious stimulants as a robust model for haunted houses. Specifically, it appears that the hypothetical influence of environmental variables touted by some authors 2016; Alexander and Muzzillo, 2010/2014; McAndrew, 2015, does not consistently match their observed influence. We conclude therefore that an exclusively or chiefly environmental model — i.e., relying on discrete embedded cues, air quality, temperature, infrasound, lighting levels, or electromagnetic fields — is presently insufficient as a general explanation for what imprints certain locations or settings with a haunted persona (or creepiness) or serves as the predominant 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p8.91
general explanation for what imprints certain locations or settings with a haunted persona (or creepiness) or serves as the predominant source of anomalous experiences in these contexts. That said, it is highly questionable that evolutionaryenvironmental perspectives on ghostly episodes have been adequately explored or tested, despite the long legacy of fieldwork studies and instrumentation in haunt related research (for overviews, see e.g., Osis, 1982; Houran and Lange, 1998; Braithwaite, 2006; Parsons and O’Keeffe, 2008; Bebergal, 2018; Moreover, we continue to anticipate slow advancements in understanding “haunted houses” given their taboo standing within many academic circles and publications. Amateur enthusiasts of the 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p9
slow advancements in understanding “haunted houses” given their taboo standing within many academic circles and publications. Amateur enthusiasts of the paranormal tend neither to be professionally trained nor scientifically oriented yet they dominate the popular view of haunt investigation and accordingly taint a fascinating and valid subject. This situation is unfortunate, because empirical study in this domain transcends parapsychology to be potentially instructive for exploring or refining important issues across the social and biomedical sciences. These include sensory processing sensitivity and perceptual biases (van Elk, 2015; sick building syndrome , mass (contagious) psychogenic illness , embodied cognition the neurobiology and physiology 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p9.09
perceptual biases (van Elk, 2015; sick building syndrome , mass (contagious) psychogenic illness , embodied cognition the neurobiology and physiology of emotion place identity and attachment the nature of creepiness extraordinary architectural experiences , and the psychology of sacred or enchanted spaces Accordingly, scientific efforts to describe haunted houses and related phenomena in environmental terms should address several issues. First, our literature review revealed a dearth of detailed and quality research in this area. Future studies must therefore strive to measure discrete physical factors more consistently, comprehensively, and precisely. Fieldwork should include experts in architectural design, engineering, environmental sciences, and 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p9.18
measure discrete physical factors more consistently, comprehensively, and precisely. Fieldwork should include experts in architectural design, engineering, environmental sciences, and physics. Such specialists in environmental and architectural phenomenology could be invaluable in developing or implementing new research designs. Furthermore, investigations must consider individual differences in the attentional, emotional, and perceptual thresholds of experients versus non experients in haunt type cases and Pekala, 2001; Lange and Houran, 2001a,b; Houran et al., 2002a; Jawer, 2006; Romer, 2013; Laythe et al., 2018; Parra, It could be that the types of physical variables reviewed here are germane to a subset of witness reports grounded in 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p9.27
could be that the types of physical variables reviewed here are germane to a subset of witness reports grounded in hypervigilance or heightened sensitivities to these conventional stimuli. “Gestalt influences” are additional factors whose role in this domain have yet to be understood. These are ambient, structural, or contextual variables that have the capacity to influences a person’s perceptions, feelings, and impressions of specific spaces and settings. Jawer et al. discussed several examples relevant to haunt type experiences, including: (i) affordance, (ii) atmosphere, (iii) ambiguity and threat anticipatory processes, (iv) immersion and presence, (v) legibility, and (vi) percipient memory and associations 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p9.36
(ii) atmosphere, (iii) ambiguity and threat anticipatory processes, (iv) immersion and presence, (v) legibility, and (vi) percipient memory and associations that can be involved in apparitional/spiritual phenomena and are specifically encoded or contextually re encoded through haunted, enchanted, and sacred places. These effects might involve, but are not limited to, the discrete physical factors proposed as stimulants of anomalous experiences. Gestalt influences instead speak to the larger concept of systems theory person bidirectional or enactive processes) . This holistic view identifies psychosocial elements as important contributors to the onset or structure of personal experiences, which agrees with conclusions from our 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p9.45
identifies psychosocial elements as important contributors to the onset or structure of personal experiences, which agrees with conclusions from our broad sociocultural analyses of ghost narratives To be sure, considerable evidence implicates attitudinal, normative, and situational influences in the phenomenology of witness accounts 2002, 2003b; French et al., 2009; Drinkwater et al., 2013, 2017; Dagnall et al., 2015a; Laythe et al., 2018; Pharino et al., 2018; Such findings underscore that physical variables might not be the primary culprits in most haunt cases. For instance, Aulet and Vidal stated that “Sacred spaces are complex realities whose internal dynamics must be studied from 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p9.54
cases. For instance, Aulet and Vidal stated that “Sacred spaces are complex realities whose internal dynamics must be studied from a multidisciplinary and transversal perspective that draws on anthropology, sociology, theology, philosophy, tourism, culture and more” . Likewise, haunted houses could be variants of enchanted or sacred spaces and thus may have eluded definitive explanation for millennia due to roots in complex interactions (or dynamical systems; e.g., Lange and Houran, 2000, Lange among certain physical variables, sociocultural influences, situational context, and interpersonal dynamics — all of which shape the character of spaces and settings, as well as define how experiencers are 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p9.63
interpersonal dynamics — all of which shape the character of spaces and settings, as well as define how experiencers are ultimately situated inside them. In closing, we would be remiss not to mention an environmental model for haunts taken to the extreme. This is the possibility that human consciousness, and indeed all that we experience as reality, derives from a sophisticated hologram or computer program, as depicted in the sci fi film franchise, The Matrix. Academics refer to this as the “simulation hypothesis”, and if valid it implies that ghosts are quite literally in the machine. That is, the anomalies 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p9.72
the “simulation hypothesis”, and if valid it implies that ghosts are quite literally in the machine. That is, the anomalies that characterize haunt type episodes might represent glitches in the software or hardware that produces or operates the simulation. The idea that ghostly phenomena can be interpreted in informational terms parallels some thinking in parapsychology . More pointedly, Merali outlined conceptual and empirical arguments consistent with the simulation hypothesis, and “Is the Universe a Simulation?” was even the central topic of the 2016 Isaac Asimov Memorial Debate at the American Museum of Natural History . This intriguing notion, like that of 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p9.81
the 2016 Isaac Asimov Memorial Debate at the American Museum of Natural History . This intriguing notion, like that of ghosts and parapsychological agencies, might be a stretch and eventually prove incorrect. Nevertheless, asking these types of questions underscores the fundamental need that human beings apparently have to explore and understand all facets of their holistic environments. We sympathize with paranormal experients in this regard because academia does not yet have a convincing, comprehensive, and scientific explanation for haunted houses — and without dedicated and inclusive research it never will. 	An Environmental Appraisal of “Haunted Houses”:  p9.9
Scale The Australian Sheep Goat Scale (ASGS) is a commonly used measure of belief in the paranormal. The scale contains items that index extrasensory perception (ESP), psychokinesis (PK), and life after death (LAD). Although, research employs the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale as both a general (unidimensional) and factorial (multidimensional) measure, few studies have examined the appropriateness of these solutions. Accordingly, the present paper tested the psychometric integrity of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale via two studies. Study 1 assessed Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factorial structure using confirmatory factor analysis. To achieve this, merging 	Australian Sheep:  p0
Scale via two studies. Study 1 assessed Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factorial structure using confirmatory factor analysis. To achieve this, merging of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale data from previously published studies and ongoing work created a heterogeneous sample of 1,601 responses. Analysis revealed that a two factor bifactor model best explained Australian Sheep-Goat Scale organization. This comprised a general overarching factor incorporating two subfactors (ESP and PK). Factor loadings and omega reliability supported a unidimensional structure for the most part. Removal of life after death items improved model fit because the factor added unnecessary complexity and undermined scale psychometric integrity. Study 2, using 	Australian Sheep:  p0.2
after death items improved model fit because the factor added unnecessary complexity and undermined scale psychometric integrity. Study 2, using a supplementary composite sample of 320 respondents, assessed the convergent validity of the emergent Australian Sheep-Goat Scale model against a recently published Revised Paranormal Belief Scale (RPBS) bifactor solution. Comparison revealed high convergent validity. The general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor, despite deriving from only psi related dimensions (ESP and PK) predicted Revised Paranormal Belief Scale scores. This finding indicated that Australian Sheep-Goat Scale brevity relative to the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale is advantageous when assessing general belief in the paranormal. The 	Australian Sheep:  p0.42
Sheep-Goat Scale brevity relative to the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale is advantageous when assessing general belief in the paranormal. The ASGS, notwithstanding limited construct content, functions as an effective measure of paranormal belief. Additionally, Study 2 replicated the bifactor structure identified in Study 1 and invariance testing supported invariance of form, factor loadings and item intercepts for this solution across Studies 1 and 2. Keywords: belief in the paranormal, Australian Sheep Goat Scale, Revised Paranormal Belief Scale, bifactor model, convergent validity INTRODUCTION Within parapsychology, the term sheep goat denotes believers (sheep) and disbelievers (goats) in the paranormal . The nomenclature originated 	Australian Sheep:  p0.64
INTRODUCTION Within parapsychology, the term sheep goat denotes believers (sheep) and disbelievers (goats) in the paranormal . The nomenclature originated from Gertrude Schmeidler who observed that increased performance within ESP experiments was associated with the belief that ESP was possible within that particular setting. ESP in this context referred to “the non inferential acquisition of information relating to stimuli which is inexplicable in terms of ‘orthodox’ sensory communication” . Since Schmeidler’s exact use of the sheep goat designation, the term has broadened to include belief in the possibility of ESP, experiencing ESP and acceptance of psychic phenomena generally [psychokinesis (PK) and 	Australian Sheep:  p0.87
broadened to include belief in the possibility of ESP, experiencing ESP and acceptance of psychic phenomena generally [psychokinesis (PK) and life after death (LAD)]. More generally, researchers employ the label ubiquitously to signify the presence or absence of belief in the paranormal . Thalbourne and Delin noted this generalization arose from a widening of the notion of the paranormal to include a broad spectrum of supernatural phenomena. Originally, the descriptor ‘paranormal’ served merely as a synonym for psychic. Generic usage of the sheep goat distinction, in part, evolved from a lack of conceptual agreement about the nature and structure of the 	Australian Sheep:  p1.04
the sheep goat distinction, in part, evolved from a lack of conceptual agreement about the nature and structure of the paranormal. Hence, although measurement instruments adhere to common guidelines, such as Broad’s Basic Limiting Principles causation, no action at a distance, or perception of physical events/objects unmediated by sensations) , content across scales varies significantly. For example, the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale (RPBS) characterizes the paranormal as a multidimensional construct comprising several item clusters (traditional religious belief, psi, witchcraft, superstition, spiritualism, extraordinary life forms and precognition). Contemporary psychometric assessment of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale recommends a bifactor structure comprising a 	Australian Sheep:  p1.14
extraordinary life forms and precognition). Contemporary psychometric assessment of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale recommends a bifactor structure comprising a single overarching construct, encompassing several related, but conceptually independent subfactors . The presence of topics outside of core parapsychology within measurement instruments reflects the stretching and blurring of paranormal boundaries Illustratively, the Paranormal Short Inventory contains questions about unidentified flying objects. Furthermore, scales frequently include items indexing belief in fringe subject matter, such as new age treatments acupuncture) and lost continents . Although, these topics share thematic features with the paranormal, notably unusualness and lack of a genuine evidential basis, they 	Australian Sheep:  p1.23
. Although, these topics share thematic features with the paranormal, notably unusualness and lack of a genuine evidential basis, they are not strictly supernatural because they challenge rather than necessitate change within current scientific thinking. Acknowledging these conceptual issues, Thalbourne and Delin recommended restriction of the sheep goat distinction to core parapsychological phenomena. This focus informed the content and development of sheep goat measures. Over the years, various scales have assessed the sheep goat variable. These have differed in terms of factors and item numbers (i.e., single vs. multiple items) . Notable examples are the Icelandic and Australian Sheep Goat scales. 	Australian Sheep:  p1.33
factors and item numbers (i.e., single vs. multiple items) . Notable examples are the Icelandic and Australian Sheep Goat scales. The Icelandic version contains questions about belief in general extrasensory perception (ESP) [“do you believe that the existence of telepathy (thought transference) or clairvoyance”], precognition (“do you believe that the ability to know the future or to have dreams about it is”) and frequency of reading about psychic phenomena (“do you read books or articles on psychic phenomena”). Higher scores indicate stronger belief in ESP. The Australian Sheep Goat Scale (ASGS) began as a list of questions assessing endorsement of 	Australian Sheep:  p1.42
indicate stronger belief in ESP. The Australian Sheep Goat Scale (ASGS) began as a list of questions assessing endorsement of ESP (belief in/experience) and life after death (the possibility of contact with the deceased) within participants taking part in an ESP experiment . Subsequent item analysis produced a 10 item measure, which provided support for the sheep goat dichotomy via correlation with experimental performance . Further ESP related work supported the scale’s predictive power Although, some studies observed no significant relationship between belief and performance As researchers became increasingly aware of potential psychological differences between believers and non believers the need 	Australian Sheep:  p1.52
between belief and performance As researchers became increasingly aware of potential psychological differences between believers and non believers the need for general measures of paranormal belief increased. For instance, researchers observed effects for locus of control , social interest , death threat and death concerns , dream interpretation , personality and critical thinking . Accordingly, the Paranormal Belief Scale and the 10 item Australian Sheep-Goat Scale emerged as prevalently used measures. In 1983, the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale added additional ESP items assessing belief in the possibility of precognition, sender initiated and receptive telepathy . Beyond increasing construct breadth, the 13 item 	Australian Sheep:  p1.61
assessing belief in the possibility of precognition, sender initiated and receptive telepathy . Beyond increasing construct breadth, the 13 item version demonstrated no additional psychometric benefits; the scale correlated highly with the extant 10 item version . The modified Australian Sheep-Goat Scale featured in several published studies In 1985, the scale appended five further items indexing belief and experience of PK. Comparisons across Australian Sheep-Goat Scale versions (10 , 13 , and 18 item) revealed high correlations. Psychometric evaluation of the 18 item Australian Sheep-Goat Scale specified the measure was a satisfactory measure of belief in and experience of core psychic 	Australian Sheep:  p1.71
18 item Australian Sheep-Goat Scale specified the measure was a satisfactory measure of belief in and experience of core psychic phenomena. The scale demonstrated good reliability (internal and test–retest) and concurrent validity Exploratory factor analysis, using principal components analysis, confirmed that the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale contained three factors ESP, psychokinesis and Afterlife . This built on previous analysis, which supported the notion that the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale was multidimensional Along with variations in content, Australian Sheep-Goat Scale response formats have differed choice, six point Likert and visual analog) . The forced choice format presents items as statements (e.g., “I believe in 	Australian Sheep:  p1.81
choice, six point Likert and visual analog) . The forced choice format presents items as statements (e.g., “I believe in ESP”) alongside three alternative responses, “false” (zero), “uncertain” (one), and “true” (two). Summative scores range from 0 to 36, with higher scores indicating increased levels of paranormal belief The six point Likert scale replaces fixed choices with options between “strongly disagree” and “strongly agree” Roe advocated use of the Likert scale format because he was critical of the visual analog response style. The visual analog format, asks respondents to record level of item agreement on a horizontal line anchored by goat 	Australian Sheep:  p1.9
style. The visual analog format, asks respondents to record level of item agreement on a horizontal line anchored by goat and sheep belief. The horizontal line is 44 units long (one unit = one eighth if an inch). Scores on each item are obtained using a rule and range from 1 to 44; recoded as 1–10 = 0, 11–30 = 1, and 31–44 = 2. Dividing totals by 22 produced values from 0.05 to 2. Totaling across items and rounding generates scores between 1 and 36. This scoring system approximates the false, uncertain and true format . A subsequent Australian Sheep-Goat 	Australian Sheep:  p2
scores between 1 and 36. This scoring system approximates the false, uncertain and true format . A subsequent Australian Sheep-Goat Scale adaptation by Lange and Thalbourne purified the scale. This involved Rasch scaling, which identified New Age related and Traditional Belief items (LAD). Removal of the life after death items to correct for bias reduced the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale to 16 items. The advantage of Rasch scaling is that it produces interval level scores, which are independent of gender and age bias. Despite these psychometric developments, the majority of studies continue to use the original 18 item measure and fail to 	Australian Sheep:  p2.08
bias. Despite these psychometric developments, the majority of studies continue to use the original 18 item measure and fail to apply Rasch scaling. Failure to apply Rasch scaling is problematic because the two Australian Sheep-Goat Scale items that form the life after death factor are not productive to measurement and may compromise the validity of the scale . At a factorial level, Rasch scaling indicates that the life after death subscale does not function as a reliable measurement tool. Indeed, removal of the life after death factor produces a single factor New Age Belief solution This issue potentially compromises analysis at 	Australian Sheep:  p2.17
of the life after death factor produces a single factor New Age Belief solution This issue potentially compromises analysis at the factorial level, especially in studies, which focus on subscale differences . However, at a global level, this is less of a concern because slight age and gender biases have less impact on the overall measurement of paranormal belief. Hence, original 18 item scale remains an internally reliable measure of belief in the paranormal. The 18 item Australian Sheep-Goat Scale across response formats has typically demonstrated internal reliability in the good to excellent range . Illustratively, Thalbourne and Delin reported a 	Australian Sheep:  p2.25
response formats has typically demonstrated internal reliability in the good to excellent range . Illustratively, Thalbourne and Delin reported a Cronbach alpha (a) of 0.94 for the visual analog scale and Dagnall et al. an alpha of 0.92 for the forced choice version. Foreign translations have demonstrated similar levels of internal reliability. For example, Swedish and Portuguese . The Rasch version of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale also possesses good (a = 0.82, Dagnall et al., to excellent internal reliability. Assessing the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale alongside equivalent measures of belief in the paranormal the Manchester Metropolitan University New, Dagnall et al., 	Australian Sheep:  p2.34
the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale alongside equivalent measures of belief in the paranormal the Manchester Metropolitan University New, Dagnall et al., reveals that the scale in terms of internal reliability performs at a commensurate level . In summary, Australian Sheep-Goat Scale appraisal was required in order to provide conceptual clarity. Specifically, appreciation of the factorial structure of provides guidelines for the subsequent implementation and analysis of data collected via the ASGS. Accordingly, the present paper examined whether the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale functioned best as a multidimensional or general measure. Relative to the RPBS, few studies use Australian Sheep-Goat Scale subscales to assess 	Australian Sheep:  p2.42
best as a multidimensional or general measure. Relative to the RPBS, few studies use Australian Sheep-Goat Scale subscales to assess variations in belief. However, this has occurred and informed the formation of nuanced conclusions about the functional properties of inferred dimensions and LAD) . This paper tested the veracity of this approach by including multidimensionality vs. unidimensionality within a single analysis. Explicitly, bifactor modeling assessed Australian Sheep-Goat Scale dimensionality and factorial solution adequacy. This analysis was vital to defining the boundaries of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale use. In this context, previous work has failed to delineate adequately the dimensionality of the ASGS. 	Australian Sheep:  p2.51
of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale use. In this context, previous work has failed to delineate adequately the dimensionality of the ASGS. Noting the established use of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale within the parapsychological and psychological literature and the fact that researchers report both unidimensional and factorial scores, this paper undertook two studies examining the measure’s psychometric integrity. Study 1 tested Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factorial structure, and Study 2, evaluated measurement invariance of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and its performance in relation to the RPBS. STUDY 1: FACTORIAL STRUCTURE OF THE AUSTRALIAN SHEEP GOAT SCALE Within published work researchers have used the Australian 	Australian Sheep:  p2.6
the RPBS. STUDY 1: FACTORIAL STRUCTURE OF THE AUSTRALIAN SHEEP GOAT SCALE Within published work researchers have used the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale as both a unidimensional and multidimensional measure (ESP, PK, and LAD) Although it is rare to use Australian Sheep-Goat Scale subscales, there are clear advantages to the inclusion of factorial comparisons. Specifically, although ESP and psychokinesis collectively represent forms of psi, the degree to which people endorse the phenomena varies. Generally, as evidenced by reported instances ESP appears more plausible and probable than psychokinesis . In this context, it is important to assess the effectiveness of the Australian Sheep-Goat 	Australian Sheep:  p2.68
plausible and probable than psychokinesis . In this context, it is important to assess the effectiveness of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale at both a general and factorial level. Recent related work examined the factorial structure of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale . After consideration of a range of theoretically and empirically driven models, Drinkwater et al. identified the best fitting data model. This was a bifactor model comprising a single overarching construct, derived from related, but conceptually distinct subfactors. This approach usefully delimited the most appropriate scoring system for the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale and reaffirmed the veracity of research using 	Australian Sheep:  p2.77
usefully delimited the most appropriate scoring system for the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale and reaffirmed the veracity of research using general and seven factor solutions. Accordingly, Study 1 examined whether it was valid for researchers to use both unidimensional and factorial Australian Sheep-Goat Scale solutions. As with the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale paper, the intention was to delineate appropriate scale scoring. Method Respondents Merging of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale data sets from published studies and continuing work produced a large heterogeneous sample . Several researchers have previously employed this approach to assess scale structure and integrity. Notably, evaluation of Revised Paranormal Belief 	Australian Sheep:  p2.85
. Several researchers have previously employed this approach to assess scale structure and integrity. Notably, evaluation of Revised Paranormal Belief Scale structure , top down purification of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale , and Need for Closure Scale validation . Merging of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale data sets was appropriate because the researchers had previously used the measure in comparable studies addressing different research questions. Combining these data made it possible to examine the psychometric structure of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale using sophisticated statistical techniques. Large data sets facilitate the performance of complex analytical methods by virtue of enhanced statistical power and 	Australian Sheep:  p2.94
sophisticated statistical techniques. Large data sets facilitate the performance of complex analytical methods by virtue of enhanced statistical power and greater within sample variation . For these reasons, Brown advocates that confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) should use as many cases as possible. In this context, amalgamation of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale data sets was an expedient method that utilized existing screened data to meet these parameters. More generally, integration of small data sets avoids research costs associated with study design, recruitment and data collection, and produces a sample that would typical prove difficult to recruit because of time and cost constraints. The 	Australian Sheep:  p3.03
data collection, and produces a sample that would typical prove difficult to recruit because of time and cost constraints. The mean (M) sample age was 27.01 years Disaggregation by gender revealed that 547 respondents were male and 1054 female . Data collection occurred between September 2012 and September 2016 (see “Ethics” section). Recruitment was by emails to students (undergraduate and postgraduate) enrolled on healthcare programs Physiotherapy, Psychology, Speech and Language Therapy, etc.), staff across faculties at a United Kingdom university, and local businesses/community groups. There were two exclusion criteria. Firstly, respondents had to be at least 18 years of age. 	Australian Sheep:  p3.12
and local businesses/community groups. There were two exclusion criteria. Firstly, respondents had to be at least 18 years of age. Secondly, in order to prevent multiple responses instructions stated that respondents must not participate if they had undertaken similar research. Materials The only measure used in Study 1 was the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale The Australian Sheep-Goat Scale assesses belief in and alleged experience of, ESP, PK, and LAD. The scale contains 18 items presented as statements. For example, “I believe in the existence of ESP” and “I believe I have marked psychokinetic ability.” Participants respond to each item on a three 	Australian Sheep:  p3.21
the existence of ESP” and “I believe I have marked psychokinetic ability.” Participants respond to each item on a three point scale (false = 0, Raw scores range from 0 to 36, with upper scores indicating increased levels of belief in the paranormal. High scoring individuals are believers (‘sheep’) and low scorers non believers (‘goats’). Study 1 consistent with general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale use included all items. The 18 item version possesses high reliability and generally performs similarly to the Rasch version . Procedure Respondents completed the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale in conjunction with measures assessing cognitive perceptual personality factors, decision making 	Australian Sheep:  p3.31
version . Procedure Respondents completed the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale in conjunction with measures assessing cognitive perceptual personality factors, decision making and anomalous beliefs. All studies used the same basic standardized procedures. Prior to participation, the researchers presented prospective respondents with comprehensive background information. This contained the purpose of the study and outlined ethical procedures. Respondents agreeing to participate recorded informed consent by selecting an option confirming their willingness to take part. They then received the study materials, which comprised the relevant measures and scales. Respondents also provided basic demographic information (age, preferred gender, course of study if student, etc.). Procedural instructions 	Australian Sheep:  p3.4
measures and scales. Respondents also provided basic demographic information (age, preferred gender, course of study if student, etc.). Procedural instructions directed respondents to work through the sections systematically at their own pace, to answer all questions in an open and honest manner, and reassured respondents that there were no right or wrong answers. Section order rotated across respondents to prevent potential order effects. Ethics As part of the grant bidding process, the researchers obtained ethical approval for a program of studies exploring relationships between anomalous beliefs, decision making and cognitiveperceptual personality factors Each proposal was sanctioned (ethics, procedure and methodology) and 	Australian Sheep:  p3.5
exploring relationships between anomalous beliefs, decision making and cognitiveperceptual personality factors Each proposal was sanctioned (ethics, procedure and methodology) and rated as routine. The Director of the Research Institute for Health and Social Change Health, Psychology and Social Care) and Ethics Committee within the Manchester Metropolitan University granted ethical approval. This is the necessary level of institutional approval. Furthermore, before submission research bids are peer reviewed by members of the Professoriate (or suitably qualified research staff). This formative process considers the appropriateness of ethics, procedures and analysis. Research proposals also receive approval from the Head of the Psychology Department. Data Analysis 	Australian Sheep:  p3.59
appropriateness of ethics, procedures and analysis. Research proposals also receive approval from the Head of the Psychology Department. Data Analysis Plan Analysis evaluated a series of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale models. Firstly, a one factor model, which acted as a baseline comparison for later solutions. Next, a correlated three factor model based on Thalbourne and Delin examined whether ESP, PK, and life after death subfactors most effectively represented the ASGS. A bifactor version of this three factor solution assessed the multidimensionality vs. unidimensionality assumption. Subsequently, a model based on Lange and Thalbourne tested whether a single New Age Belief factor removed) best 	Australian Sheep:  p3.69
unidimensionality assumption. Subsequently, a model based on Lange and Thalbourne tested whether a single New Age Belief factor removed) best represented the ASGS. A correlated two factor variant of this condensed 16 item version of the scale tested goodness of fit, with the identification of subfactors consistent with those initially proposed by Thalbourne and Delin (i.e., ESP and PK, but not LAD). Lastly, a bifactor version of this solution assessed data model fit. A range of indices determined goodness of fit. The chi square statistic compares the expected and observed covariance matrix, with a non significant difference preferable. Chi square, however, 	Australian Sheep:  p3.78
The chi square statistic compares the expected and observed covariance matrix, with a non significant difference preferable. Chi square, however, typically over rejects good models. Accordingly, additional absolute fit indices Mean Square Error of Approximation, RMSEA; Standardized Root Mean Square Residual, SRMR) assessed fit, with values of 0.05, 0.06–0.08, and 0.08–1.0 indicative of good, satisfactory, and marginal fit was included for RMSEA. Relative fit indices Index, CFI; Incremental Fit Index, IFI) compared a null with a proposed model; values above 0.90 suggest good fit and values above 0.86 infer marginal fit Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC) compared models with the same quantity 	Australian Sheep:  p3.87
suggest good fit and values above 0.86 infer marginal fit Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC) compared models with the same quantity of variables; lower values indicate superior fit. Lastly, alpha and omega coefficients determined the reliability of the ASGS. Coefficient omega (&) and omega hierarchical (&h) provide more effective estimates of reliability of bifactor models Coefficient omega considers specific and general factor variance in its reliability estimation, whereas hierarchical omega computes the reliability of a latent factor minus the variance from other general and specific factors. Results Preliminary Analyses Data screening assessing non normality occurred prior to analysis. Skewness values were between 	Australian Sheep:  p3.97
general and specific factors. Results Preliminary Analyses Data screening assessing non normality occurred prior to analysis. Skewness values were between 􀀀3 to C3, as recommended by Griffin and Steinbrecher . However, Mardia’s kurtosis coefficient suggested multivariate non normality (101.058 with a critical ratio of Therefore, proceeding with CFA can lead to standard error biases if a correction procedure is not applied Analyses consequently used bootstrapping (600 resamples), which does not rely on normal data assumptions when calculating standard error estimates. Bootstrapping generates an empirical distribution related to a statistic of interest by resampling from the original data. Naïve bootstrapping performs 	Australian Sheep:  p4.06
Bootstrapping generates an empirical distribution related to a statistic of interest by resampling from the original data. Naïve bootstrapping performs efficiently even in situations of severe non normality and is a robust alternative to methods including the Satorra Bentler chi square . CFA utilized bootstrap resampling (via the bias correction technique) to limit standard error biases and compute accurate confidence intervals at the 95% level . The Bollen Stine bootstrap p examined fit in addition to absolute and relative fit indices. Bollen Stine is appropriate in situations where non normality is present because it assesses fit without normal theory limitations, with 	Australian Sheep:  p4.15
Bollen Stine is appropriate in situations where non normality is present because it assesses fit without normal theory limitations, with p > 0.05 a desirable result . An inspection of intercorrelations revealed that the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale total score and the subfactors of ESP, PK, and life after death possessed significant positive relationships. A large correlation of 0.96 existed between Australian Sheep-Goat Scale total and ESP, which is reflective of the fact that ESP comprises a large number of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale items . The lowest intercorrelation existed between psychokinesis and LAD, r = 0.29, p < 0.001. Confirmatory Factor Analysis 	Australian Sheep:  p4.25
Scale items . The lowest intercorrelation existed between psychokinesis and LAD, r = 0.29, p < 0.001. Confirmatory Factor Analysis The one factor model reported a poor fit, $2 (135, = 4539.67, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.66, IFI = 0.66, RMSEA = 0.14 , SRMR = 0.10. Bollen Stine, p = 0.002, also indicated poor fit. The correlated three factor model suggested unsatisfactory fit on all indices, $2 = 2310.88, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.83, IFI = 0.83, RMSEA = 0.10 (90% CI but SRMR = 0.80. Bollen Stine, p = 0.002, indicated poor fit. A three factor bifactor 	Australian Sheep:  p4.34
= 0.10 (90% CI but SRMR = 0.80. Bollen Stine, p = 0.002, indicated poor fit. A three factor bifactor model reported marginal fit, $2 = 1746.75, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.88, IFI = 0.88, RMSEA = 0.09 , SRMR = 0.06. Bollen Stine, p = 0.002, indicated poor fit. A lower AIC for the three factor bifactor solution existed in comparison with one factor and correlated three factor variants, suggesting the bifactor was most suitable for the data. The one factor model based on Lange and Thalbourne fitted poorly overall, $2 = 3861.74, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.68, 	Australian Sheep:  p4.44
one factor model based on Lange and Thalbourne fitted poorly overall, $2 = 3861.74, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.68, IFI = 0.68, RMSEA = 0.15 (90% SRMR = 0.10. Bollen Stine, p = 0.002, supported poor fit. A correlated two factor version of Lange and Thalbourne reported unsatisfactory fit on all indices, $2 = 2102.99, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.83, IFI = 0.83, RMSEA = 0.11 but SRMR = 0.08. Bollen Stine, p = 0.002, supported unsatisfactory fit. A twofactor bifactor solution indicated good fit on all indices, $2 = 1196.78, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.91, IFI = 	Australian Sheep:  p4.53
twofactor bifactor solution indicated good fit on all indices, $2 = 1196.78, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.91, IFI = 0.91, SRMR = 0.06, but RMSEA = 0.09 (90% CI of suggested marginal fit. Bollen Stine, p = 0.002, supported poor fit. However, given marginal to good fit existed on absolute and relative indices, it is possible the Bollen Stine result is symptomatic of the large sample . Accordingly, analysis considered the Standardized Residual Covariance Matrix. The majority of residual covariances should be less than two if the model signifies good fit , this was apparent for approximately 85% of cases. 	Australian Sheep:  p4.62
should be less than two if the model signifies good fit , this was apparent for approximately 85% of cases. Consultation of AIC across the 16 item solutions suggested that the bifactor variant fitted these data more suitably than the one factor and correlated two factor model . Compared with the three factor bifactor model, the two factor bifactor solution possessed marginally superior data model fit. This therefore was the most appropriate factorial conceptualization of the ASGS. An inspection of factor loadings for the two factor bifactor model revealed that all items loaded above the minimum cutoff of 0.32 on the 	Australian Sheep:  p4.72
loadings for the two factor bifactor model revealed that all items loaded above the minimum cutoff of 0.32 on the general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor. In comparison, items 3, 4, 2, and 13 did not significantly load on the ESP subfactor, indicating that these items more directly predicted a general factor. In addition, negative loadings were evident for some ESP items, which can unexpectedly occur in bifactor models as a function of a crossover suppression effect . The average factor loadings were 0.56 on PK, 0.03 on ESP, and 0.58 on the general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor. Although loadings were satisfactory 	Australian Sheep:  p4.81
were 0.56 on PK, 0.03 on ESP, and 0.58 on the general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor. Although loadings were satisfactory for PK, items 15, 16, 17 loaded more highly than on the general factor. Interestingly, these items index personal experience of PK, which are slightly different in tone to the rest of the measure that focuses more on belief. Overall, belief within the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale best represented a general factor, particularly in relation to ESP items. However, items related to psychokinesis also require consideration. The poor data model fit of the one factor 16 item solution reinforces this finding. Reliability 	Australian Sheep:  p4.9
psychokinesis also require consideration. The poor data model fit of the one factor 16 item solution reinforces this finding. Reliability The 16 item Australian Sheep-Goat Scale possessed high reliability (a = 0.89, 95% CI Reliability was high for both the psychokinesis (a = 0.85, and ESP (a = 0.87, 95% CI of 0.86 to subfactors. For completeness, assessment of the 18 item Australian Sheep-Goat Scale reported high reliability . Internal consistency was slightly lower for life after death (a = 0.69, 95% CI however, this was close enough to the threshold of 0.70 to be deemed acceptable. In addition, Nunnally 	Australian Sheep:  p5
0.69, 95% CI however, this was close enough to the threshold of 0.70 to be deemed acceptable. In addition, Nunnally and Bernstein suggest that an alpha above 0.60 is satisfactory within psychological science. Consistent with alpha, coefficient omega reported high reliability for a general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor , psychokinesis , and ESP . Omega hierarchical was reasonably high for a general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor . Lower estimates existed for psychokinesis and ESP . A general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor explained 69% of the variance. psychokinesis and ESP accounted for 22.3% and 8.7%, respectively. The percentage of uncontaminated correlations (PUCs) 	Australian Sheep:  p5.14
explained 69% of the variance. psychokinesis and ESP accounted for 22.3% and 8.7%, respectively. The percentage of uncontaminated correlations (PUCs) was 45.8%, signifying a reasonable number of correlations reflect general factor variance. Discussion Study 1 found that a two factor bifactor model best represented Australian Sheep-Goat Scale measurement. This comprised a general overarching factor encompassing two related, but conceptually independent subfactors (ESP and PK). Omega reliability supported this conceptualization. However, an important degree of variance existed for Australian Sheep-Goat Scale subfactors, particularly PK. The poor datamodel fit of the one factor solution reinforced the validity of the two factor bifactor solution. 	Australian Sheep:  p5.3
particularly PK. The poor datamodel fit of the one factor solution reinforced the validity of the two factor bifactor solution. Therefore, it is likely that the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale reflects a unidimensional structure for the most part, but specific psychokinesis items need consideration when implementing the measure. Concurring with Lange and Thalbourne , analysis suggested that the New Age related items best measured belief in the paranormal. Removal of life after death items, indexing Traditional Belief, improved model fit. These items added unnecessary complexity to the model. Omission of the life after death subscale is conceptually and psychometrically appropriate because the 	Australian Sheep:  p5.45
added unnecessary complexity to the model. Omission of the life after death subscale is conceptually and psychometrically appropriate because the subscale comprises only two items. Accordingly, life after death fails to assess adequately construct breadth. Additionally, informed advocates of paranormal powers class ESP and psychokinesis as forms of psi. This notion derives from the supposition that ESP and psychokinesis arise from inexplicable forces beyond the understanding of established physical principles. Hence, there is considerable parapsychological debate about the extent to which the two alleged phenomena share common features and/or overlap . Some theorists have gone so far as to question whether 	Australian Sheep:  p5.6
the two alleged phenomena share common features and/or overlap . Some theorists have gone so far as to question whether ESP and psychokinesis represent a unitary domain . Whereas, other theorists view the two phenomena as complementary, but distinct in terms of characteristics and predisposing conditions. This notion accords with layperson accounts of psi. Thus, although the phenomena share considerable variance, individuals more commonly report ESP experiences and people generally consider the existence of ESP more likely than psychokinesis Contrastingly, life after death represents a distinct belief dimension. The RPBS, despite issues with factorial structure, acknowledges this distinction. Explicitly, life after 	Australian Sheep:  p5.75
after death represents a distinct belief dimension. The RPBS, despite issues with factorial structure, acknowledges this distinction. Explicitly, life after death within the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale straddles two separate factors, traditional religious belief continues to exist though the body may die”) and spiritualism (i.e., “It is possible to communicate with the dead”). These are distinct to the psi subscale, which comprises a combination of psychokinesis and ESP items, respectively. Overall, Study 1 indicated that the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale functions well at a global level. The original two factor solution (with life after death omitted) was the best fitting bifactor model. 	Australian Sheep:  p5.9
at a global level. The original two factor solution (with life after death omitted) was the best fitting bifactor model. STUDY 2: INVARIANCE AND CONVERGENT VALIDITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN SHEEP GOAT SCALE The Revised Paranormal Belief Scale due to its breadth and multidimensionality features in a range of empirical research. Indeed, the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale is the most widely used measure of paranormal belief within psychology . Conversely, parapsychologists tend to use the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale because it focuses on fundamental paranormal concepts (extra sensory perception, psychokinesis and LAD). The preference for the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale stems from the fact 	Australian Sheep:  p6.81
fundamental paranormal concepts (extra sensory perception, psychokinesis and LAD). The preference for the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale stems from the fact that the measure evolved within parapsychology, where it subsequently developed an acknowledged reputation. The fact that psychology and parapsychology often use different measures to assess belief in the paranormal creates potential issues. Primarily, the concern that results may arise as an artifact of the scale used and may not extrapolate across studies. For these reasons, it is important to ensure that the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale and Australian Sheep-Goat Scale index the same underlying construct. This is not easy to establish 	Australian Sheep:  p9.16
the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale and Australian Sheep-Goat Scale index the same underlying construct. This is not easy to establish because few studies have used the scales concurrently. When employed together, studies report high positive correlations between the two measures Indeed, the scales share approximately 60% variance. This suggests that the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale assesses the core aspects of the paranormal belief indexed by the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale (ESP, LAD, and PK). Convergent validity testing will examine the degree of convergence between the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and RPBS. An additional method that tests whether the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale is 	Australian Sheep:  p11.51
of convergence between the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and RPBS. An additional method that tests whether the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale is transferable across studies is invariance testing. This assesses whether measurement interpretation is consistently across contexts and populations (and hence differences reflect true mean variations) or if any observed differences in scores are likely due to an artifact of the measure . A paucity of research has examined invariance of the ASGS. Study 2 examined measurement invariance and the convergent validity of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale bifactor model specified in Study 1. Specifically, following analysis of factor structure invariance tests examined whether 	Australian Sheep:  p13.83
the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale bifactor model specified in Study 1. Specifically, following analysis of factor structure invariance tests examined whether the bifactor solution was invariant across each of the samples used Evaluating invariance among samples from separate studies is consistent with the approach of Schellenberg et al. , and determines whether the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale is trustworthy across different studies. Furthermore, using structural equation modeling (SEM) in a latent modeling context, Study 2 evaluated the extent to which Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scores predicted the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale bifactor solution identified by Drinkwater et al. . This was important because convergence 	Australian Sheep:  p16.17
scores predicted the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale bifactor solution identified by Drinkwater et al. . This was important because convergence specifies the extent to which the scales measure general paranormal belief and share conceptual overlap (ESP and PK). In addition, analysis via SEM is preferable to alternative approaches, such as regression analysis, because SEM incorporates a simultaneous assessment of latent constructs and measurement error when assessing relationships This provides a more parsimonious evaluation of the shared variance among variables. Another advantage of SEM is the assessment of the measurement models in a confirmatory manner prior to testing structural relationships. By focusing 	Australian Sheep:  p18.52
of SEM is the assessment of the measurement models in a confirmatory manner prior to testing structural relationships. By focusing on the degree of consistency between data and proposed factor model, SEM offers a rigorous assessment of the scales. This approach ensures that prior to testing structural relationships measures are reliable and fit with the existing a priori conceptions. Method Respondents The sample comprised 320 respondents who had completed both the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and the RPBS. Respondents mean (M) age = 29.57 . Within the sample 95 were male and 225 female . Respondents were collected following the perimeters outlined 	Australian Sheep:  p20.87
= 29.57 . Within the sample 95 were male and 225 female . Respondents were collected following the perimeters outlined in Study 1. Since the original studies looked at a range of beliefs over a period of time instructions told respondents not to participate if they had previously completed research on belief in the paranormal. This direction ensured that Studies 1 and 2 contained different respondents. Measures Study 2 used the 16 item version of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale tested in Study 1 and the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale . The Revised Paranormal Belief Scale contains items that assess belief in 	Australian Sheep:  p23.22
Study 1 and the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale . The Revised Paranormal Belief Scale contains items that assess belief in the paranormal. Respondents indicate level of agreement to statements (e.g., “There is a devil”) on a seven point Likert scale (responses range from 1 = strongly The Revised Paranormal Belief Scale comprises seven belief dimensions: Traditional Religious Belief (TRB), Psi Belief (PSI), Precognition (PRE), Superstition (SUP),Witchcraft (WIT), Spiritualism (SPIR), and Extraordinary Lifeforms (ELF). Previous research documents that the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale has adequate reliability and validity. Specifically, Drinkwater et al. reported a Cronbach alpha of 0.93 for the full scale. 	Australian Sheep:  p25.57
Scale has adequate reliability and validity. Specifically, Drinkwater et al. reported a Cronbach alpha of 0.93 for the full scale. The subscales were also satisfactorily reliable (apart from ELF). Specifically, Traditional Religious Belief a = 0.88 ; witchcraft a = 0.80 ; PSI a = 0.83 (95% superstition a = 0.83 ; Spiritualism a = 0.83 ; precognition a = 0.86 (95% ELF indexed lower reliability, as a = 0.54 . Additional existing studies report concerns with the ELF subscale , and this is a commonly accepted issue with the RPBS. Accordingly, theorists generally regard the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale as 	Australian Sheep:  p20.3
and this is a commonly accepted issue with the RPBS. Accordingly, theorists generally regard the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale as a satisfactory measure of belief in the paranormal overall . Some critics question the dimensionality of the measure. A recent paper by Drinkwater et al. recommends a bifactor solution, where the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale best represents belief in the paranormal as a general overarching construct comprising several related, but conceptually independent subfactors. Procedure and Ethics Procedure and ethics were identical in Study 1. As in previous projects, when respondents completed the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and Revised Paranormal Belief Scale together, 	Australian Sheep:  p13.3
in Study 1. As in previous projects, when respondents completed the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and Revised Paranormal Belief Scale together, scale presentation order was counterbalanced. Data Analysis Plan Prior to assessing structural relationships, CFA examined the two factor bifactor Australian Sheep-Goat Scale model from Study 1 and the bifactor Revised Paranormal Belief Scale model independently. Alpha and omega coefficients determined scale reliability. Multi group CFA assessed invariance in relation to progressively restrictive models among the sample from Study 1 and Study 2 . Models tested invariance at the configural (invariance of form or factor structure), metric (invariance of factor loadings) and 	Australian Sheep:  p7.01
2 . Models tested invariance at the configural (invariance of form or factor structure), metric (invariance of factor loadings) and scalar (invariance of item intercepts) level. This comprises an assessment of configural, weak and strong factorial invariance . Further tests (i.e., strict invariance) are unnecessary given these are rarely satisfied . Critical values using Chen’s criteria determined suitable fit at each stage: a CFI difference below 0.01 alongside an RMSEA difference less than 0.015. Invariance did not consider chi square due to its sensitivity with large samples, as recommended by Brown . To examine the convergent validity of the ASGS, 	Australian Sheep:  p7.09
due to its sensitivity with large samples, as recommended by Brown . To examine the convergent validity of the ASGS, both specific and general factors of the bifactor model were regressed onto the RPBS. Specifically, the established seven factor bifactor solution of Drinkwater et al. acted as the criterion. In this model, a general factor of paranormal belief explained the majority of Revised Paranormal Belief Scale variance; therefore, the general factor acted as the dependent variable while controlling for the variance of the seven factors. The relative strength of general vs. specific subfactors of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale in relation to 	Australian Sheep:  p7.17
of the seven factors. The relative strength of general vs. specific subfactors of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale in relation to the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale indicates which facets most appropriately align with an established index of paranormal belief. Analysis considered identical model fit indices to Study 1. Results Preliminary Analyses Skewness scores were within the range of 􀀀3 to C3 . However, examination of Mardia’s kurtosis coefficient revealed multivariate non normality: Australian Sheep-Goat Scale (132.34, critical Revised Paranormal Belief Scale , and both scales in conjunction . As with Study 1, analyses used bootstrapping to generate confidence intervals at the 95% 	Australian Sheep:  p7.25
and both scales in conjunction . As with Study 1, analyses used bootstrapping to generate confidence intervals at the 95% level (bias corrected) The Bollen Stine bootstrap p additionally examined fit. Significant intercorrelations existed among all variables, with the lowest correlation between Extraordinary Lifeforms and PK, r = 0.19, p = 0.001. Similar to Study 1, a high correlation existed between ESP and ASGS, r = 0.98, p < 0.001. The highest correlation among Revised Paranormal Belief Scale and Australian Sheep-Goat Scale subfactors existed in relation to ESP and Spirituality, r = 0.71, p < 0.001. Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and Revised 	Australian Sheep:  p7.33
Scale subfactors existed in relation to ESP and Spirituality, r = 0.71, p < 0.001. Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and Revised Paranormal Belief Scale correlated positively, r = 0.71, p < 0.001. Confirmatory Factor Analysis and Reliability Analysis via CFA reported good fit across all indices for the two factor bifactor Australian Sheep-Goat Scale solution, $2 = 279.78, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.91, IFI = 0.91, RMSEA = 0.08 (90% CI of 0.07 SRMR = 0.06. Bollen Stine, p = 0.002, suggested poor fit. However, the majority of standardized residual covariances were below 2. The seven factor bifactor Revised Paranormal Belief 	Australian Sheep:  p7.41
suggested poor fit. However, the majority of standardized residual covariances were below 2. The seven factor bifactor Revised Paranormal Belief Scale solution reported good data model fit, $2 = 677.120, p<0.001, CFI = 0.93, IFI = 0.93, RMSEA = 0.07 , SRMR = 0.06. To maintain consistency with Drinkwater et al. analysis permitted error covariance between items 1 and 15, 3, and 17, 21 and 26. Bollen Stine, p = 0.002, inferred poor fit. However, the majority of standardized residual covariances were below 2, suggesting that the estimated model fitted these data well. Similar to Study 1, Australian Sheep-Goat Scale items 	Australian Sheep:  p7.49
were below 2, suggesting that the estimated model fitted these data well. Similar to Study 1, Australian Sheep-Goat Scale items loaded reasonably well on a general factor with an average loading of 0.54. In addition, items loaded sufficiently on psychokinesis (average loading of and lower on ESP . Consistent with Study 1, items 15, 16, 17 loaded highly on psychokinesis and to a greater degree than the general factor. Negative loadings were again apparent for ESP. This subfactor was more complex to interpret in the presence of a general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor. It is important to note that these negative 	Australian Sheep:  p7.57
to interpret in the presence of a general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor. It is important to note that these negative loadings occurred in the context of positive, significant loadings on a general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor. Relatedly, all Revised Paranormal Belief Scale items loaded relatively highly on a general factor (all apart from item 20 . These results infer satisfactory replication of the bifactor factorial structure of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and the RPBS. Alpha reliability of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and ESP was high. Reliability of psychokinesis was satisfactory. Coefficient omega was also high for Australian Sheep-Goat Scale , psychokinesis , 	Australian Sheep:  p7.65
ESP was high. Reliability of psychokinesis was satisfactory. Coefficient omega was also high for Australian Sheep-Goat Scale , psychokinesis , and ESP . Omega hierarchical was high for a general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor , with lower results for psychokinesis and ESP . A general factor accounted for 68.1% of common variance, with psychokinesis and ESP explaining 2.25% and 0.93%, respectively. Consistent with Study 1, a reasonable number of correlations reflected general factor variance . Internal consistency of Revised Paranormal Belief Scale total was high (a = 0.94, 95% CI Similarly, reliability was high for Revised Paranormal Belief Scale subscales: Traditional 	Australian Sheep:  p7.73
Scale total was high (a = 0.94, 95% CI Similarly, reliability was high for Revised Paranormal Belief Scale subscales: Traditional Religious Belief , superstition (a = 0.84, 95% CI witchcraft , Spiritualism , and precognition (a = 0.84, 95% CI Reliability was satisfactory for PSI (a = 0.79, ELF possessed an alpha below 0.60 of 0.59 . This result was consistent with previous research concerning psychometric properties of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale . Omega reported similarly high reliability for Revised Paranormal Belief Scale , Traditional Religious Belief , PSI , witchcraft , superstition , Spiritualism , and precognition . ELF 	Australian Sheep:  p7.81
Paranormal Belief Scale , Traditional Religious Belief , PSI , witchcraft , superstition , Spiritualism , and precognition . ELF was lower . A high omega hierarchical coefficient existed for a general Revised Paranormal Belief Scale factor compared with Traditional Religious Belief , PSI , witchcraft , superstition , Spiritualism , precognition , and ELF . The general factor explained 59.2% of common variance and the PUCs was high supporting the superiority of a general factor. Multi Group Analysis Invariance testing used bootstrapping and the Bollen Stine p value due to the presence of data non normality across Studies 1 	Australian Sheep:  p7.9
testing used bootstrapping and the Bollen Stine p value due to the presence of data non normality across Studies 1 and 2. Mardia’s coefficient supported this decision . Assessment of configural invariance for the bifactor Australian Sheep-Goat Scale model across Study 1 and Study 2 suggested satisfactory data model fit, $2 (172, = 1724.92, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.89, IFI = 0.89, RMSEA = 0.06 , SRMR = 0.06. A metric invariance test reported an acceptable CFI difference of 0.006 and an RMSEA difference of 0.003. Assessment of scalar invariance supported strong factorial invariance Bollen Stine p = 0.002, yet 	Australian Sheep:  p7.98
and an RMSEA difference of 0.003. Assessment of scalar invariance supported strong factorial invariance Bollen Stine p = 0.002, yet 85% of standardized residual covariances were lower than 2. Model Test A full structural test of the linear relationship between the bifactor Australian Sheep-Goat Scale model and the bifactor Revised Paranormal Belief Scale model reported satisfactory data model fit, $2 = 1799.54, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.89, IFI = 0.89, RMSEA = 0.06 (90% CI of 0.06 SRMR = 0.06. Bollen Stine, p = 0.002, suggested poor fit. However, the majority of standardized residual covariances were below 2. An examination 	Australian Sheep:  p8.08
Bollen Stine, p = 0.002, suggested poor fit. However, the majority of standardized residual covariances were below 2. An examination of structural paths revealed that the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale general factor (ASGS) significantly predicted the general Revised Paranormal Belief Scale factor while accounting for the variance of the seven Revised Paranormal Belief Scale subfactors, b = 0.81, p = 0.002 . ESP and PK, however, did not significantly predict RPBS, b = 􀀀0.28, p = 0.19 and b = 0.01, p = 0.84 (95% CI respectively. The model accounted for 73.9% of variance in RPBS. The next model in order to 	Australian Sheep:  p8.2
= 0.84 (95% CI respectively. The model accounted for 73.9% of variance in RPBS. The next model in order to examine the effect of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale subfactors on RPBS, constrained the path from Australian Sheep-Goat Scale to Revised Paranormal Belief Scale to zero. The constrained solution reported marginal fit on all indices $2 = 1799.54, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.88, IFI = 0.88, RMSEA = 0.06 but SRMR = 0.10, indicated unacceptable fit. Inspection of the structural paths indicated that ESP and psychokinesis significantly predicted Revised Paranormal Belief Scale in the absence of ASGS, b = 0.87, p < 	Australian Sheep:  p8.32
that ESP and psychokinesis significantly predicted Revised Paranormal Belief Scale in the absence of ASGS, b = 0.87, p < 0.001 (95% CI of 0.80 and b = 0.23, p = 0.002 , respectively. AIC values (in addition to the fit indices mentioned above) specified that the full model possessed a superior data model fit compared with the constrained model . In addition, Bollen Stine p = 0.002. Compared with the full model, a considerably greater number of residual covariances were higher than 2, inferring that the full model estimated these data more appropriately. Results supported the superiority of a general 	Australian Sheep:  p8.43
higher than 2, inferring that the full model estimated these data more appropriately. Results supported the superiority of a general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor in predicting a related criterion (RPBS). Due to successful replication with a separate sample, findings established convergent validity of the bifactor Australian Sheep-Goat Scale structure. Particularly, they provide evidence of a strong relationship with a comparable measure of paranormal belief. Discussion Study 2, revealed high convergent validity between the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and Revised Paranormal Belief Scale bifactor solutions. The general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor despite deriving only from psi related dimensions (ESP and PK) predicted Revised 	Australian Sheep:  p8.55
bifactor solutions. The general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor despite deriving only from psi related dimensions (ESP and PK) predicted Revised Paranormal Belief Scale scores. This suggested that the brevity of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale in relation to the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale is a distinct advantage when assessing general paranormal belief. The Australian Sheep-Goat Scale despite limited construct content appears to function as an effective measure of paranormal belief. A discrepancy relates to the negative relationship between ESP and Revised Paranormal Belief Scale in the full model. As documented in previous research , the patterns of predictive relations in a bifactor 	Australian Sheep:  p8.67
Belief Scale in the full model. As documented in previous research , the patterns of predictive relations in a bifactor analysis can be the opposite of zero order correlations. ESP and Revised Paranormal Belief Scale possessed an initial r = 0.71. This discrepancy is likely a function of the general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor assuming variance in the analysis given the relationship between ESP and Revised Paranormal Belief Scale emerged as positive after controlling for ASGS. Additionally, Study 2 replicated the factorial structure identified in Study 1 with a discrete sample of respondents. Particularly, a general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor accounted 	Australian Sheep:  p8.79
factorial structure identified in Study 1 with a discrete sample of respondents. Particularly, a general Australian Sheep-Goat Scale factor accounted for the majority of scale variance and possessed a similar magnitude of average factor loading. psychokinesis demonstrated reasonably high factor loadings, and ESP recorded a low average factor loading, suggesting that the majority of items likely predict general ASGS. Omega hierarchical estimates supported these results. Measurement invariance tests comparing Study 1 with Study 2 respondents supported configural, weak and strong invariance for the bifactor Australian Sheep-Goat Scale solution. Findings confirmed that the bifactor Australian Sheep-Goat Scale model was robust and, 	Australian Sheep:  p8.91
invariance for the bifactor Australian Sheep-Goat Scale solution. Findings confirmed that the bifactor Australian Sheep-Goat Scale model was robust and, to an extent, generalizable. Study 2 also successfully replicated the seven factor bifactor Revised Paranormal Belief Scale solution of Drinkwater et al. . OVERALL DISCUSSION Assessment of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale structure revealed that a two factor bifactor model, comprising a general paranormal belief dimension encompassing two discrete but related facets (ESP and PK), demonstrated superior fit. Factor loadings were higher for a general factor and hierarchical omega indicated that a general factor accounted for the majority of variance. These results support 	Australian Sheep:  p9.04
a general factor and hierarchical omega indicated that a general factor accounted for the majority of variance. These results support the notion that the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale measures general level of paranormal belief and is, for the most part, unidimensional . In practice, findings recommend the use of total scale scores as opposed to independent subscales. An amount of non redundant variance existed, however, particularly for PK. In addition, ESP and psychokinesis subscales were conceptually compatible with their factor labels and demonstrated reliability. These subscales can be utilized when administering the measure, but in the presence of general scale scores. This 	Australian Sheep:  p9.25
demonstrated reliability. These subscales can be utilized when administering the measure, but in the presence of general scale scores. This conclusion is consistent with other published work relating to bifactor models . Invariance testing supported invariance of form, factor loadings and item intercepts across both Studies 1 and 2. These results are encouraging because they suggest that differences in Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scores are likely to reflect true mean variations rather than measurement bias, thus supporting future use of the measure across different subpopulations/samples. From a belief measurement perspective, the emergent model was congruent with the view that ESP and psychokinesis 	Australian Sheep:  p9.45
across different subpopulations/samples. From a belief measurement perspective, the emergent model was congruent with the view that ESP and psychokinesis denote associated forms of phenomena. Indeed, based on global taxonomic features, parapsychology classifies both as forms of psi. Conceptual overlap arises from the fact that ESP and psychokinesis arise from alleged psychic/mental powers, whose existence contravenes established scientific principles. These characteristics apply also to other phenomena. Hence, the term psi embraces further paranormal occurrences, such as precognition and remote viewing . Consideration of individual psi facets reveals that they vary greatly in terms of credibility. This is important in the context 	Australian Sheep:  p9.66
Consideration of individual psi facets reveals that they vary greatly in terms of credibility. This is important in the context of the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale because previous empirical work reveals that people generally believe that ESP is more plausible and probable than psychokinesis Higher endorsement rates and reported instances evidence this Contrastingly, life after death items do not relate to psychic/mental powers. Instead, they assess belief in spirits and the afterlife. These notions draw on elements of religious belief and spiritualism as acknowledged by the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale . This distinction is also apparent within Lange and Thalbourne’s Rasch scaling 	Australian Sheep:  p9.87
as acknowledged by the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale . This distinction is also apparent within Lange and Thalbourne’s Rasch scaling of the ASGS, which identified a New Age related factor comprising psychokinesis and ESP, and a Traditional Belief dimension composed of life after death items. Consistent with Lange and Thalbourne , the present paper found that exclusion of the life after death or Traditional Belief dimension improved model fit. The life after death subscale undermined scale integrity by adding unnecessary complexity to the measure. Overall, the present findings supported the veracity of previous research, which has used the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale 	Australian Sheep:  p10.03
to the measure. Overall, the present findings supported the veracity of previous research, which has used the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale as an overall and factorial measure of belief in the paranormal. However, conclusions derived from the life after death require further evaluation and replication with more reliable measures. Alternatively, in order to increase life after death construct breadth and subscale integrity researchers could generate and assess the effectiveness of additional afterlife related items. The life after death subscale focuses particularly on the survival hypothesis. This is a broad construct, which necessitates consideration of related concepts, such as religious beliefs and spiritualism. 	Australian Sheep:  p10.11
the survival hypothesis. This is a broad construct, which necessitates consideration of related concepts, such as religious beliefs and spiritualism. The Revised Paranormal Belief Scale acknowledges this. Additionally, reference to ghosts and hauntings would prove useful because these subjects are associated with the afterlife and represent commonly endorsed paranormal beliefs and frequently reported experiences Given the importance of these phenomena it is odd that they are absent from both the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and Revised Paranormal Belief Scale . The current study suggests that the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale are of equal importance. The notion that 	Australian Sheep:  p10.19
study suggests that the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale are of equal importance. The notion that the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale is superior to the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale is unjustified. Rogers et al. claimed that content and psychometric issues undermined Revised Paranormal Belief Scale validity. The present paper found that these measures demonstrated good convergent validity. Both index general paranormal belief and function as equivalent measures. This finding corresponded with Dagnall et al. , who demonstrated that the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and Revised Paranormal Belief Scale produced comparable findings when assessing relationships between belief in the paranormal 	Australian Sheep:  p10.27
the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and Revised Paranormal Belief Scale produced comparable findings when assessing relationships between belief in the paranormal and susceptibility to probabilistic biases. Clearly, the present results support the notion that outcomes do not vary as a function of using the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale or RPBS. This seems obvious, but given the previously published criticism, is an important result worth noting. Accordingly, researchers should feel confident when using either measure of paranormal belief. Limitations Within the present paper, both studies assessed belief in the paranormal at only one point in time. Study 1 evaluated Australian Sheep-Goat Scale structure 	Australian Sheep:  p10.35
both studies assessed belief in the paranormal at only one point in time. Study 1 evaluated Australian Sheep-Goat Scale structure via completion of the measure, and Study 2, used a cross sectional design to further assess Australian Sheep-Goat Scale structure and examine convergent validity between the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and RPBS. This approach was potentially problematic because scores may vary over time. In the context of the current study, this was less of a concern because paranormal beliefs generally remain temporally stable . Additionally, both the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and Revised Paranormal Belief Scale have previously demonstrated satisfactory test–retest reliability indicating 	Australian Sheep:  p10.43
stable . Additionally, both the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and Revised Paranormal Belief Scale have previously demonstrated satisfactory test–retest reliability indicating that scores remain relatively unchanging. Concerning Australian Sheep-Goat Scale structure, Study 2 replicated the model found in Study 1, indicating that the two factor bifactor was robust and replicable within an independent sample. Future studies may wish to assess further temporal stability by testing respondents on two different occasions. In addition, the same items loaded highly on psychokinesis relative to a general factor across the two studies. Therefore, it would be beneficial for future research to consider controlling for these items 	Australian Sheep:  p10.51
general factor across the two studies. Therefore, it would be beneficial for future research to consider controlling for these items (e.g., as a method factor) when utilizing the ASGS. From a psychometric perspective, the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale possesses limitations similar to the RPBS. Particularly, potential response bias arising from an overreliance on positively phrased statements. Typically, scale designers add negative particles (reverse orienting), or use words with an opposite meaning (reverse wording) to counter the tendency to agree to questions (acquiescence bias) or select extreme options (extreme responses) . Although, test developers view this as good practice , in the context 	Australian Sheep:  p10.59
bias) or select extreme options (extreme responses) . Although, test developers view this as good practice , in the context of belief scales reversed items are highly problematic . Specifically, they are difficult to comprehend and failure to endorse specific items does not indicate disbelief. With complex notions such as ESP, rejecting particular instances does not necessarily indicate lack of belief in the general domain. For example, a person may not believe it possible to predict the future via dreams, but may consider that visions and feelings can foretell forthcoming events. For these reasons, positively worded items that represent the degree 	Australian Sheep:  p10.67
may consider that visions and feelings can foretell forthcoming events. For these reasons, positively worded items that represent the degree to which respondents endorse the existence of phenomena appear adequate. Indeed, the performance of the one reversed Revised Paranormal Belief Scale item provides support for this contention. This question typically performs poorly in comparison to other scale items (with the exception of the extraordinary life forms subscale). The problem of reversing items generally is that respondents often miss negative content. This is especially true when a reversed statement is located within a block of standardly phrased items . This occurs because 	Australian Sheep:  p10.76
is especially true when a reversed statement is located within a block of standardly phrased items . This occurs because inattention can produce misappropriate item grouping. This may explain why reversed items frequently load on separate factors and fail to confirm to general factorial models These issues are consistent with the conclusion of Van Sonderen et al. , who contend that reversing items is a counterproductive strategy that results in response contamination arising from respondent inattention and confusion. The Australian Sheep-Goat Scale is one of the most commonly used measures of paranormal belief, it is therefore essential that researchers appreciate the 	Australian Sheep:  p10.84
Scale is one of the most commonly used measures of paranormal belief, it is therefore essential that researchers appreciate the measure’s advantages and limitations. The present study is important because it provides the background for and an overview of the ASGS. Concomitantly, this article advises on scoring and interpretation. Recently, similar work with the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale produced conceptual clarity and an implementation framework . In this context, analysis suggests that the measure functions best as an overall measure of paranormal belief. Generally, the study of paranormal belief is of value because such beliefs are widely held within society they 	Australian Sheep:  p10.92
paranormal belief. Generally, the study of paranormal belief is of value because such beliefs are widely held within society they are an important aspect of the human condition , and believers (vs. non believers) demonstrate important differences (psychological, pathological, sociological, etc.) . These may influence the way people think, perceive, interpret, and comprehend the world. Hence, the investigation of paranormal belief affords insights into everyday cognitions and behaviors and in doing so contributes to several academic disciplines parapsychology, neuroscience, physics, engineering, and biology). At a practical level, research on paranormal belief informs understanding of psychological functioning and well being . Accordingly, 	Australian Sheep:  p11
and biology). At a practical level, research on paranormal belief informs understanding of psychological functioning and well being . Accordingly, well designed measures help researchers to identify correlates of beliefs, and in doing so advise the development of complex multivariate models. Recently, these have usefully combined belief with cognitive perceptual personality factors and preferential thinking style. This approach has resulted in the emergence of dual influence models that apply to other beliefs and behaviors . Additionally, this approach has been highly productive in promoting understanding of scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs generally 	Australian Sheep:  p11.47
main types of apparitions in paranormal accounts are: Crisis Apparitions: Seen during moments of crisis or death. Residual Apparitions: Repeatedly re enact a specific event. Intelligent Apparitions: Interact with the living. Shadow Figures: Dark, shadowy human shapes. Poltergeists: Associated with physical disturbances. Temporal lobe lability refers to the tendency of the temporal lobes to become easily excitable or unstable, leading to unusual sensory experiences, heightened emotional responses, or hallucinations. It’s often associated with conditions like epilepsy and can contribute to perceptions of paranormal phenomena. The Temporal Lobe Symptoms (TLS) inventory is a questionnaire designed to assess the frequency 	ChatGPT :  p0.02
contribute to perceptions of paranormal phenomena. The Temporal Lobe Symptoms (TLS) inventory is a questionnaire designed to assess the frequency and intensity of symptoms associated with temporal lobe activity, such as déjà vu, auditory and visual hallucinations, and intense emotions. It\'s used to study links between temporal lobe function and various experiences, including those interpreted as paranormal. The Temporal Lobe Symptoms (TLS) inventory typically includes questions about: Déjà vu experiences: Frequency and intensity. Hallucinations: Auditory, visual, and olfactory occurrences. Intense emotions: Sudden, unprovoked emotional changes. Memory lapses: Unexplained gaps or distortions in memory. Unusual perceptions: Sensations of a presence or being watched. Out of body experiences: Feelings of 	ChatGPT :  p1.24
gaps or distortions in memory. Unusual perceptions: Sensations of a presence or being watched. Out of body experiences: Feelings of detachment from the body. Poltergeist phenomena are often attributed to: Psychokinesis: Unconscious mind affecting the physical environment. Environmental factors: Electrical, geological, or structural disturbances. Psychological factors: Stress or emotional turmoil in individuals, often adolescents. A haunt is a location believed to be frequented by ghosts or supernatural entities. Causes often cited include: Traumatic events: Death or violence in the area. Unfinished business: Spirits with unresolved issues. Energy imprints: Emotional or psychic energy lingering in the environment. Psychological factors: Suggestibility and perception of individuals. The concept of emotional or 	ChatGPT :  p1.84
Emotional or psychic energy lingering in the environment. Psychological factors: Suggestibility and perception of individuals. The concept of emotional or psychic energy lingering in the environment is based on the idea that intense emotions or traumatic events can leave an "imprint" on a location, potentially manifesting as residual hauntings. This is largely a theoretical idea without scientific evidence, often explained through: Stone Tape Theory: Suggests that physical materials, like stone, can record emotional energy. Energy Fields: Belief that emotional energy affects and alters the local energy field. Collective Consciousness: Shared human experiences creating a lasting psychic imprint. 	ChatGPT :  p3.26
“Apparitions are wavering, uncertain, semi intelligent things, and the majority of people still regard it as ludicrous to spend time in examining them, while science thrusts them aside as empty stories.” Tyrrell’s “Apparitions”, p. 40 This paper was written in order to provide a summary of research into people’s contemporary experiences of apparitions. The material presented here is different to material presented in other papers at the conference in two main respects: firstly, the majority of material examines experiences from a psychological or parapsychological perspective; and secondly, most of the material 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p108
respects: firstly, the majority of material examines experiences from a psychological or parapsychological perspective; and secondly, most of the material covered here, whether it is from an experiment or an account of an experience, is from present day sources, as opposed to the early modern period that most of the papers from the conference were covering. The aim of this was to provide the delegates at the conference with an idea of how present day apparitional experiences are actively researched, in the hope that this might provide fresh perspective on historical and literary accounts of apparitional experiences. Introduction The first major 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p108.18
the hope that this might provide fresh perspective on historical and literary accounts of apparitional experiences. Introduction The first major research into the existence of apparitional experiences and the explanations of the causes of apparitions was a census conducted by some of the and the traditions of scientific enquiry that they used to research this continues today. However, apparitional research has always been an area fraught with difficulty when trying to approach it from a parapsychological perspective. When researching cases parapsychologists often encounter two separate problems; emotion and belief. No matter what the perceived cause might be, a person who experiences 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p108.38
often encounter two separate problems; emotion and belief. No matter what the perceived cause might be, a person who experiences an “apparition” associates a certain emotional significance with it. This might be fear due to an unexplainable event or pleasure at seeing a loved one. Whatever the emotional significance might be, the emotional aspects of the experience often influence the reporting of events that the individual experienced. This idiosyncratic influence on the reporting of the event also extends to the personal belief that the individual has applied to the event, which further clouds any “objective facts” that might be gained from 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p108.58
belief that the individual has applied to the event, which further clouds any “objective facts” that might be gained from the experience. The beliefs that individuals hold about apparitional phenomena are particularly pertinent here as the commonly held belief is that they are “the spirits of dead people”, often referred to as the spirit hypothesis.2 However, as will be shown here, there have been a number of different explanations offered by researchers to explain the phenomena known as “apparitions”, of which the spirit hypothesis represents only one. Parapsychological research into apparitions has been primarily concerned with defining apparitions, investigating the phenomenological 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p108.78
the spirit hypothesis represents only one. Parapsychological research into apparitions has been primarily concerned with defining apparitions, investigating the phenomenological characteristics of the apparitional experience, and constructing theories about the causes of apparitions. Also outlined here are some of the techniques that have been used in order to investigate the nature of apparitional experiences. Defining apparitions and related phenomena Braude has suggested that it is difficult to describe apparitions without using a particular theoretical framework.3 He initially highlights Price’s definition,4 which he criticised because it used the terms “non physical”, which implies that it has no objective reality, and the term 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p108.99
he criticised because it used the terms “non physical”, which implies that it has no objective reality, and the term “human being”, which can be criticised not only from the perspective that there are a number of reported cases of the apparitions of inanimate objects , but also from the perspective that many apparitions reported by people are wearing clothes. The second definition Braude criticises is that proposed by Broad6, where he defines all apparitions as being hallucinations, which is a theoretical assumption and automatically dismisses all of the other theories of apparitions, many of which are covered in a later 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p109.14
theoretical assumption and automatically dismisses all of the other theories of apparitions, many of which are covered in a later section. By doing this Broad’s definition places restrictions on the extent to which apparitional experiences can be discussed. For Broad, they are always hallucinations, and therefore only the nature of the hallucination can be discussed. For the purposes of this paper, an adapted version of Thalbourne’s definition of apparitions will be used. This “working definition” is as follows, “A sensory7 experience in which there appears to be present a person or animal (deceased or living) who is in fact out of 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p109.28
in which there appears to be present a person or animal (deceased or living) who is in fact out of sensory range of the experient...”.8 In this definition, there is an attempt to offer a purely descriptive definition of the phenomena experience, which is removed from theoretical constraints. As a consequence of this, the definition is very broad. Although it is not strictly a definition of apparitions, one of the most influential categorisations of the different types of apparitions experienced was proposed by Tyrrell, who divided them into four separate categories; experimental apparitions, crisis apparitions, post mortem apparitions and finally, ghosts.9 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p109.43
proposed by Tyrrell, who divided them into four separate categories; experimental apparitions, crisis apparitions, post mortem apparitions and finally, ghosts.9 Tyrrell’s first category, experimental apparitions, refers to cases where a living person has attempted to deliberately make an apparition of themselves appear to another. One of the most famous examples of an experimental apparition was performed and documented by S. H. Beard, in Gurney et al.’s “Phantasms of the Living”. In December 1882, Beard attempted to project an apparition of himself into the house of his fiancée, Miss L. S. Verity. At 9.30 pm he felt as if he had slipped 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p109.58
into the house of his fiancée, Miss L. S. Verity. At 9.30 pm he felt as if he had slipped into a “mesmeric sleep”, where he found himself unable to move.10 At 10 pm he regained full consciousness and made a note of his experience, determined to reattempt the experience at 12 pm in an effort to make the residents of the house aware of his presence. He went to the house the following day and spoke to the married sister of Miss Verity, who was staying in the house at the time. During their conversation she informed him that; “At 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p109.73
of Miss Verity, who was staying in the house at the time. During their conversation she informed him that; “At about half past nine she had seen me [Beard] in the passage, going from one room to another, and at 12 pm, when she was wide awake, she had seen me enter the bedroom and walk around to where she was sleeping, and to take her hair… into my hand.” After hearing this account, Beard shocked the people present even further by producing the note he had made the night before from his pocket. This experience has to be examined in 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p109.87
by producing the note he had made the night before from his pocket. This experience has to be examined in light of the fact that we do not know what motivations S. H. Beard had for reporting this case, and to the degree he had to prompt Miss Verity to report her experiences of the previous night. These types of cases are rare,12 and it has been suggested that they are very similar to, or possibly the same phenomena as, out ofbody experiences13. Tyrrell’s second class of apparitions, crisis apparitions, refer to the apparitions of people who are experiencing a crisis 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p110.02
ofbody experiences13. Tyrrell’s second class of apparitions, crisis apparitions, refer to the apparitions of people who are experiencing a crisis event. Death is often the crisis event, and in order to qualify as this class of apparition, the apparition has to have occurred no more than 12 hours before or after the event, this “12 hour limit” being arbitrarily drawn by Gurney (as reported by Tyrrell). Tyrrell noted that crisis apparitions have two common features; they appear so similar to real human beings that they are often mistaken for that person until they vanish, and they normally occur when people are 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p110.15
human beings that they are often mistaken for that person until they vanish, and they normally occur when people are engaged in everyday activities. Tyrrell’s third class of apparition is the post mortem apparition. This refers to an apparition of a person who has been dead for at least 12 hours, and Tyrrell notes that its characteristics are similar to the crisis apparition in the respect that the figure is often life like and appears suddenly. The apparition commonly tries to convey information unknown to the witness. One of the most frequently cited post mortem apparitions is the “Chaffin Will” case.14 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p110.28
convey information unknown to the witness. One of the most frequently cited post mortem apparitions is the “Chaffin Will” case.14 James Chaffin was a farmer living in North Carolina in the early 1900’s. In 1905 he wrote a will leaving his entire estate to his third son, Marshall, which was attested by two witnesses. In 1919, he appeared to have changed his mind about his will and wrote a second will leaving all of his property equally amongst his four sons. Although this was not witnessed, it was a valid will under North Carolina law, provided that the handwriting could be 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p110.42
Although this was not witnessed, it was a valid will under North Carolina law, provided that the handwriting could be verified to be his. He hid this copy of the will in the family diary, and wrote a note referring to the will and sewed it into the inside pocket of an overcoat belonging to him, apparently telling no one of either the second will or the note. In September 1921, James Chaffin died due to a fall and all of his property went to his third son, as per the instructions of the original will. In June 1925, James Chaffin’s 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p110.55
his property went to his third son, as per the instructions of the original will. In June 1925, James Chaffin’s second son, began to have vivid dreams of his father visiting him at his bedside. In one dream his father appeared to him dressed in his overcoat, pulled it back and said, “ ‘You will find my will in my overcoat pocket.’ ”15 The son then went to his oldest brother’s house, where he found his father’s old overcoat. After undoing the stitching he found the note, and went to his mother’s house with three witnesses, where he found the second 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p110.68
the stitching he found the note, and went to his mother’s house with three witnesses, where he found the second will in the family bible. The case then went to court, but the situation was amicably settled out of court prior to the judgement after twelve witnesses, including the wife and son of Marshall (Marshall had died within a year of his father) agreed that the handwriting of the will matched the handwriting of James Chaffin. One unusual feature of this particular case is that it occurred during a dream, although it should be noted that there is the possibility that 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p110.81
particular case is that it occurred during a dream, although it should be noted that there is the possibility that Chaffin’s second son may have forged the note and lied about his experience. Tyrrell’s final class of apparitions are simply called ghosts. Ghosts appear to “haunt” places, where they are commonly seen in the same locality on a number of instances, often by different people.16 Ghosts appear to demonstrate less awareness of their surroundings than other classes of apparition, and seem to have a more limited degree of interaction with witnesses. Tyrrell noted that, “…ghosts are more somnambulistic than other classes of 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p110.95
have a more limited degree of interaction with witnesses. Tyrrell noted that, “…ghosts are more somnambulistic than other classes of apparition, and seem to be less informed by a definite purpose.”17 Tyrrell’s taxonomy of apparitions has generally received acceptance amongst the parapsychological community,18 although he is quick to note that many apparitional cases might fit into multiple classes, and elements of each individual class can be found in others. Bayless, amongst others, has pointed out that non human apparitions are also reported, such as animals and luminous lights.19 For example, the apparition of the “black dog” has a long tradition in 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p111.09
reported, such as animals and luminous lights.19 For example, the apparition of the “black dog” has a long tradition in British folklore.20 Defining apparitions is one of the most difficult aspects of apparitional research. Many apparitional experiences have to be taken on a case by case basis, as the characteristics of the experience seem to defy the taxonomies and definitions that might be employed. Employing a particular taxonomy or definition is thwarted further by the addition of a particular theoretical framework in order to explain the cause of the experience. The phenomenological characteristics of apparitional experiences are an area that is 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p111.23
in order to explain the cause of the experience. The phenomenological characteristics of apparitional experiences are an area that is more easily explored as the characteristics can be more easily catalogued from the different case studies. Incidences of Belief and Phenomenological characteristics of apparitional experiences Incidents of belief in the existence of apparitions or ghosts (as the two terms are often used interchangeably in questionnaires and do not follow the taxonomy outlined by Tyrrell shown above) vary considerably. Palmer’s survey of residents and students in Charlottesville, Virginia, found that 17 percent of the sample believed that they have had an apparitional 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p111.37
residents and students in Charlottesville, Virginia, found that 17 percent of the sample believed that they have had an apparitional experience.21 Irwin found that 20 percent of the Australian university students in his sample believed in ghosts.22 Haraldsson et al. discovered that 31 percent of Icelandic adults in his sample believed they had seen the apparition of a dead person, and that 11 percent believed they had seen the apparition of a living one.23 One of the highest instances of belief in the existence of ghosts was found by Persinger, who found that 32 percent of the Canadians in his sample 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p111.52
in the existence of ghosts was found by Persinger, who found that 32 percent of the Canadians in his sample had seen an apparition of a person or an animal.24 A recent Gallup Poll of a randomly selected, national sample of 1,012 Americans found that 38 percent of the sample believed that, “Ghosts or...spirits of dead people can come back in certain places and situations.”25 It should be noted that the incidences of belief in apparitions have to be moderated by the way that the questionnaires and surveys ask about apparitional belief, as it is difficult to avoid any reference to 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p111.66
the way that the questionnaires and surveys ask about apparitional belief, as it is difficult to avoid any reference to a particular theoretical framework. There is a serious problem when investigating people’s belief in apparitions. There is a difference between having the experience and interpreting the experience (although the two can be interrelated). When discussing apparitions there is a predisposition to assume that you are interpreting all apparitional experiences in terms of the spirit hypothesis (this theory is discussed later). However, this places an interpretation of the experience when describing the experience. This is a problem because it dictates what people 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p111.8
this places an interpretation of the experience when describing the experience. This is a problem because it dictates what people report in apparitional cases and how they respond to apparitional belief questionnaires. For example, if a person feels that a particular experience that they had was not an “apparition” (i.e. the spirit of a dead person), but it had a more conventional explanation, then they are less likely to report it as an apparitional experience. This compounds the problems faced by investigators into apparitional experiences because it means that generally it is only people who believe that they have seen the 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p111.95
investigators into apparitional experiences because it means that generally it is only people who believe that they have seen the spirit of a dead person who report an apparitional experience. The result of this is that they are more likely to alter the narration of their experience to better fit the interpretation they have placed on the experience, with useful pieces of evidence that might lead another person to an alternative interpretation of the experience being intentionally or unintentionally left out of the narration of the experience. Therefore, when evaluating the evidence of people’s belief in the existence of apparitions, one 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p112.1
of the narration of the experience. Therefore, when evaluating the evidence of people’s belief in the existence of apparitions, one needs to remember that the people surveyed will be placing their own interpretations on the apparitional experiences that others have had.26 Research into the phenomenological characteristics of apparitional experiences is concerned with, amongst other areas, surveying and cataloguing how different aspects of the apparitional experience can be broken down into duration, realisation by the witness that they are having an experience, what different sensory modalities are activated during an experience. One of the most extensive surveys into the phenomenological characteristics of 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p112.26
what different sensory modalities are activated during an experience. One of the most extensive surveys into the phenomenological characteristics of apparitional experiences was performed by Green and McCreery, who collected over 850 questionnaires from 1968 to 1974 examining apparitional experiences.27 They found that the 45 percent of people realised that they were having an apparitional experience immediately, 18 percent did not realise they were having such an experience immediately, but knew before they stopped perceiving it, and five percent realised as the experience ended. 31 percent of Green and McCreery’s sample did not realise that they had an apparitional experience until 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p112.41
the experience ended. 31 percent of Green and McCreery’s sample did not realise that they had an apparitional experience until after the event. However, Green and McCreery do not make the distinction between witnesses who realised that it was an apparitional event immediately, and those that did not realise this until sometime after the event.28 Green and McCreery also examined the perceived duration of the experience and found that 20 percent of witnesses felt that the experience lasted for five minutes or more, and 42 percent of witnesses said the experience lasted for 15 seconds or less. They also found evidence 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p112.57
or more, and 42 percent of witnesses said the experience lasted for 15 seconds or less. They also found evidence to suggest that the majority of apparitional experiences were visual , then auditory , tactile , thermal , olfactory (eight percent) and no sense involved (four percent, presumably related to a sense of presence). The majority of cases involved only one sensory modality , but some cases involved two , three (nine percent) or more (five percent) senses being stimulated. As can be seen from the above surveys, people report having apparitional experiences, and although researchers might have difficulty in defining 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p112.73
can be seen from the above surveys, people report having apparitional experiences, and although researchers might have difficulty in defining what an apparitional experience is, members of the public each seem to have their own idea of what an apparition is and what experiencing an apparition entails. However, explaining the causes of the apparitional experience is a very different matter. Theories on the causes of apparitional experiences can be tentatively divided into subjectivist theories, those that assume that the individuals generate apparitions internally; and objectivist theories, which assume that apparitions have some form of objective reality.29 However, it can be argued 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p112.88
apparitions internally; and objectivist theories, which assume that apparitions have some form of objective reality.29 However, it can be argued that some theories can fall into both categories (e.g. an external environmental effect that causes an internal hallucination). The spirit hypothesis has already been mentioned, and is often assumed to be the primary explanation of the causes of apparitions. In its simplest form, it suggests that an apparition is the part of a person that survives bodily death.30 A variation of this hypothesis was suggested by Perry, who suggested a theory to explain the motivations of a small proportion of these 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p113.04
this hypothesis was suggested by Perry, who suggested a theory to explain the motivations of a small proportion of these “unquiet dead” might include; an attachment to the location or a person they are haunting, a call for assistance (perhaps to help the apparition deal with “unfinished business”), or the intent on behalf of the spirit to offer comfort to a loved one.31 Only a minority of parapsychologists subscribe to the spirit hypothesis now,32 but it is the hypothesis that is most readily imagined by members of the public when the words “apparition” or “ghost” are used. The main problem with 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p113.18
most readily imagined by members of the public when the words “apparition” or “ghost” are used. The main problem with this theory is its lack of falsifiability, i.e. that it is difficult to disprove that all reported cases of apparitions are not the spirits of dead people without researching every case of apparitions. Another problem with this theory is that many apparitions are reported to be wearing clothes or carrying objects, which creates a problem in explaining whether or not objects can survive bodily “death”, however, as apparitions are regularly reported as appearing to have flesh, then it could be equally 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p113.32
can survive bodily “death”, however, as apparitions are regularly reported as appearing to have flesh, then it could be equally as easy for the apparition to appear to be wearing clothes too. There are advantages to this explanation, as it might provide great comfort for those that have an apparitional experience. Some witnesses gain satisfaction that a loved one has visited them, and this might be one possible explanation of why many recently widowed persons report seeing their dead spouse.33 An alternative paranormal explanation to the spirit hypothesis is the super ESP (extra sensory perception) hypothesis, which suggests that apparitions are 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p113.46
alternative paranormal explanation to the spirit hypothesis is the super ESP (extra sensory perception) hypothesis, which suggests that apparitions are not the spirits of the dead, but are the result of a telepathic communication from a living person who knew the dead person.34 Memories about the deceased person are projected by ESP from those who knew them to the person who is having the apparitional experience. The person then sees the apparition, which matches the description of the deceased individual due to the intimate knowledge that was projected by those who knew the deceased. This may well be a variation of 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p113.6
to the intimate knowledge that was projected by those who knew the deceased. This may well be a variation of Gurney et al.’s idea of “contagious telepathy” where they argue that information about an apparitional experience is transmitted through extra sensory means, almost like an “infection”, which results in others having the same apparitional experience at a later date. Tyrrell examined the idea of telepathic communication of details about a deceased person from a more psychodynamic perspective. He suggested that there was a telepathic communication of an “idea pattern” into the unconscious mind of the witness, who then used the core 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p113.74
was a telepathic communication of an “idea pattern” into the unconscious mind of the witness, who then used the core material about a deceased person to “flesh out” their experience, resulting in a dramatic and realistic apparitional experience that can be individualistic, yet the apparition shares enough descriptive characteristics with a deceased person to be able to be recognised as that person.35 A main problem with theories that use ESP as a central explanation is that it is still unclear what mechanisms would be employed in order for an individual to acquire information about another’s personality in this manner, but they do 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p113.88
would be employed in order for an individual to acquire information about another’s personality in this manner, but they do begin to offer an explanation of how some groups of individuals can see an apparition collectively, and how information unique to the deceased person who appeared as an apparition can still described by witnesses of the apparition. Another class of theory suggests that apparitions are just hallucinations originating from the mind of the witness. Podmore suggested that all reported cases of apparitions are the result of misinterpretations of ordinary events and the imagination of the witness (i.e. hallucinations). The Diagnostic and 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p114.03
apparitions are the result of misinterpretations of ordinary events and the imagination of the witness (i.e. hallucinations). The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV, defines hallucinations as, “a sensory perception that has the compelling sense of reality of a true perception but that occurs without external stimulation of the relevant sensory organ.”36 However, the DSM IV does note that it is possible to have transient hallucinations without having a mental disorder. This is important as it suggests that almost anyone can have a full hallucinatory experience, and it is not restricted to individuals with mental disorders. This is similar 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p114.17
anyone can have a full hallucinatory experience, and it is not restricted to individuals with mental disorders. This is similar to an argument proposed by Bentall, who has examined the characteristics of hallucinations. His conclusions are particularly relevant to apparitional research, as his extensive literature review found that it is possible to experience hallucinations due to a stressful experience, such as the loss of a spouse, which might explain why many widowed persons reported sightings of the loved one they have lost. He also found that it is possible to hallucinate by hyperventilating, which could lead to a “feedback” model where 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p114.31
lost. He also found that it is possible to hallucinate by hyperventilating, which could lead to a “feedback” model where a person misperceives a conventional event, panics and begins to hyperventilate, which results in a hallucination of an apparition. Bentall also found that hallucinations are related to the personality of the witness, and hallucinators do not hallucinate random events, “… visual hallucinators see visions of dead ancestors and other persons of psychological significance to them.” 37 Bentall also found evidence that suggestion alone can create hallucinations in some participants.38 This is important to apparitional research, as some investigators have proposed that 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p114.45
suggestion alone can create hallucinations in some participants.38 This is important to apparitional research, as some investigators have proposed that suggestion alone can produce a paranormal experience. Orne suggested that demands of a social situation could influence a participant’s behaviour.39 He found that when a participant was expecting to be put into an altered state of consciousness, they would behave as if they were in the altered state, even if no attempt was made to put them in such a state. This idea was applied to apparitional research by Lange et al., who analysed 924 reported cases of apparitional experiences and 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p114.59
This idea was applied to apparitional research by Lange et al., who analysed 924 reported cases of apparitional experiences and found that nearly 62 percent of the cases were rated as displaying demand characteristics; namely that there was a direct or indirect suggestion to the witness that the environment would produce paranormal phenomena.40 Lange and Houran tested this idea by taking 22 participants individually around five different areas of a dilapidated theatre, which was normally closed to the public. Eleven of the participants were told that the research was concerned with investigating paranormal activity at the theatre. The other eleven participants 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p114.74
the participants were told that the research was concerned with investigating paranormal activity at the theatre. The other eleven participants were informed that the premises were under renovation and the research was examining people’s reactions to such environments. Participants were asked to report any experiences that they had in the theatre by completing a experiential questionnaire. They found that the “paranormal” group reported significantly more physical, mental, extra personal and transpersonal experiences than the “renovation” group, and the “paranormal” group also reported more intense emotional reaction to the location compared to the “renovation” group, even though the only difference between the 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p114.88
reported more intense emotional reaction to the location compared to the “renovation” group, even though the only difference between the two groups was what they were told about the place beforehand.41 This idea was tested by Wiseman et al., who took 678 participants around The Haunted Gallery and Georgian Rooms at Hampton Court. Half of the participants were told that the “haunted” area they were about to visit was associated with a recent increase in reports of unusual phenomena, the other half of the participants were told of no such reports. Wiseman et al. found that this suggestion had no significant 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p115.02
half of the participants were told of no such reports. Wiseman et al. found that this suggestion had no significant effects on the participants’ expectations of experiencing unusual phenomena during the experiment, or on the number of unusual experiences they reported, or to the degree they attributed an unusual experience to a ghost. However, Wiseman et al. suggest that this might have been because The Haunted Gallery has a reputation for being haunted, and that the suggestion component was a subtle one.42 When this was combined with the demand characteristics of the participants, it reduced the affect of suggestion given by 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p115.16
one.42 When this was combined with the demand characteristics of the participants, it reduced the affect of suggestion given by the experimenters. The issue of group conformity could have also played a part, as it can do when witnesses are describing spontaneous case experiences. Asch found that individual opinion has a tendency to move towards an average opinion held by a group. This is a danger in apparitional reports where an individual’s description of the characteristics of an experience might change in order to become more like the experiences reported at the same time by others, rather than retaining the uniqueness 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p115.3
in order to become more like the experiences reported at the same time by others, rather than retaining the uniqueness of the experience.43 As can be seen, there are a complex set of psychological interactions and motivations in apparitional experiences. Another such psychological motivation for reporting an apparitional experience is fraud. Witnesses might decide to put forward fraudulent claims either intentionally or unintentionally, for numerous reasons, but two possible reasons are those that are seeking attention and those that desire profit. An investigation into a reported apparitional experience by academic or non academic researchers can involve a great deal of work 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p115.44
An investigation into a reported apparitional experience by academic or non academic researchers can involve a great deal of work and research, and a considerable amount of time having to be spent with the witness. Whatever the witness’s particular psychological need might be, it can often be represented as a need for attention, which is satisfied by the investigators. This can lead to the experience being elaborated and/or reported as occurring on multiple occasions so that the investigator might be required to spend more time with the witness. Profit seekers might be seeking to create an aura of mystery and “paranormal 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p115.58
to spend more time with the witness. Profit seekers might be seeking to create an aura of mystery and “paranormal activity” around the location in order to encourage people to go there. This is obviously a tactic that would be primarily used for locations open to the public. An alternative set of theories examines the environment, instead of the paranormal or psychological, as a possible cause of apparitional experiences. Roll and Nichols44 are among a number of researchers who have examined electromagnetic causes for apparitional experiences.45 They investigated 12 sites where, “unexplained footsteps, apparitions, electrical disturbances, strange behaviour by pets and 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p115.72
electromagnetic causes for apparitional experiences.45 They investigated 12 sites where, “unexplained footsteps, apparitions, electrical disturbances, strange behaviour by pets and other haunt phenomena were reported.”46 When investigating these sites, they measured electromagnetic fields (EMF), geomagnetic fields (GMF) and ion densities. According to Roll and Nichols, transient EMFs are found in houses with inadequate grounding, and are generated by electronic equipment. GMFs are generally stable, although there are daily fluctuations from the sun, cosmic rays, the weather, etc., and local conductors (e.g. water and ore bodies) may generate field fluctuations in the local GMF. Persinger, Tiller and Koren have suggested that exposure 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p115.86
water and ore bodies) may generate field fluctuations in the local GMF. Persinger, Tiller and Koren have suggested that exposure to bursts of these variations in the magnetic fields may result in apparitional experiences.47 These experiences might also be tied into concentrations of positive ions, which are associated with effects on mood, such as “...increased irritability, depressive moods and restricted respiration.”48 Roll and Nichols found that out of 12 of the sites they investigated at which apparitional phenomena had been reported, three sites showed transient EMF increases , six sites showed GMF that were higher than the norm , and high 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p116
three sites showed transient EMF increases , six sites showed GMF that were higher than the norm , and high positive ion levels were found at seven of the 12 sites. These readings tentatively suggest that increased and transient electromagnetic field strengths, combined with the mood altering properties of increase positive ion densities might lead to an apparitional experience, although more comparative research of locations where apparitions have been seen, and places where no paranormal phenomena have been reported needs to be performed. One of the most recent theories of the causes of apparitions involves the effects that infrasound has on 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p116.14
be performed. One of the most recent theories of the causes of apparitions involves the effects that infrasound has on the human body. Back in 1998, Vic Tandy (a researcher at Coventry University), reported on an experience he had when working as an engineering designer.49 When working one night in a laboratory that had a history of being haunted, he began to feel increasingly uncomfortable and depressed, and he was sweating and felt as though there was something else in the room. After having a brief break, he continued to write at his desk, and saw a figure appear in the 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p116.27
room. After having a brief break, he continued to write at his desk, and saw a figure appear in the periphery of his vision which was grey and made no sound. He was terrified, but turned to face the apparition. When he did it disappeared. The next day he returned to the lab to fix a foil blade for a fencing competition he was entering. When he placed the foil in his bench vice, it began to frantically vibrate up and down. He began to feel frightened again, but realised for the foil to vibrate it must be receiving energy from 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p116.41
down. He began to feel frightened again, but realised for the foil to vibrate it must be receiving energy from somewhere. By experimentation with the blade it was possible to show that low frequency sound (infrasound) was present, specifically a standing wave with a frequency of 18.98 Hz. This frequency is too low for the human ear to hear50, so Tandy could not hear this sound wave. Tandy then proceeded to find out that an infrasound wave of this frequency can vibrate the whole body, which can cause hyperventilation and panic attacks, and can vibrate the eyes, which can cause a 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p116.55
vibrate the whole body, which can cause hyperventilation and panic attacks, and can vibrate the eyes, which can cause a blurring of sight, particularly in the peripheral vision, all of which is consistent with his experience. Tandy also managed to trace the cause of the infrasound wave to a faulty fan, and when the fan was repaired the infrasound wave and the ghost seemed to disappear. Tandy has suggested that infrasound waves might account for certain apparitional sightings, but infrasound waves can be transient and are difficult to detect.51 Tandy is continuing this research and is trying to develop an infrasound detector 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p116.68
be transient and are difficult to detect.51 Tandy is continuing this research and is trying to develop an infrasound detector which is affordable and takes valid measurements of infrasound, the initial tests of the detector seem promising and are necessary in order to test this theory further.52 Only a small number of the proposed causes of apparitions are shown here, but it can be seen that the suggestion that apparitions are the “spirits of the dead”, is only one possible theory amongst many. It is unlikely that one individual theory can explain all reported cases of apparitional phenomena, and each case 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p116.82
amongst many. It is unlikely that one individual theory can explain all reported cases of apparitional phenomena, and each case needs to be evaluated individually. It is possible that a combination of different theories needs to be employed in order to understand why people experience apparitions. For example, a person might see an apparition because they are in a nervous state in a location that is reportedly haunted, and yet unconsciously they want to see an apparition. After misperceiving a sound behind them, they turn around and see a hallucination of a person due to their emotional state. They then proceed 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p116.96
behind them, they turn around and see a hallucination of a person due to their emotional state. They then proceed to tell others about their experience, moderating the report so it more closely matches what others have reported. Approaches to researching apparitional experiences from a parapsychological perspective Researching apparitional experiences is difficult. Witnesses are often emotional, can forget important details about a case and often frame the experience in terms of the spirit hypotheses. As the spirit hypothesis is very difficult (if not impossible) to test, researchers into apparitional experiences must therefore gain data on the experiences and examine testable hypotheses 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p117.12
(if not impossible) to test, researchers into apparitional experiences must therefore gain data on the experiences and examine testable hypotheses on the causes of apparitions. Often, the testable hypotheses are those hypotheses that suggest apparitional phenomena are caused by conventional means. Research into apparitional experiences appears to have generally taken the form of four different types of methodology: survey research, laboratorybased replications, field based experiments, and “ghost hunter” type investigations. These four methodologies are summarised below: Survey Research Survey research into apparitional experiences takes general information from a large number of witnesses and combines them in order to give a general 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p117.3
apparitional experiences takes general information from a large number of witnesses and combines them in order to give a general impression of the characteristics of the apparitional experience. There is normally little or no attempt at trying to see if the phenomena can be explained by conventional causes in this type of research. However, data on the phenomenology and belief that surveys collect can be analysed to see if there are common themes to most experiences. One of the most extensive surveys performed on apparitional experiences was done by Green and McCreery.53 From 1968 to 1974 they had a number of 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p117.48
surveys performed on apparitional experiences was done by Green and McCreery.53 From 1968 to 1974 they had a number of postal and radio appeals for first hand accounts of apparitional experiences. They ended up with 850 completed questionnaires as a product of these appeals. Their questionnaires investigated a number of issues about apparitional experiences, such as: emotional response, time of experience, activity the witnesses were engaged in, what sensory modalities the experience activated, number of experiences, how the experience began and ended, and also about apparitions of the living, dead, animals and objects. Their research provided a great deal of information 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p117.66
ended, and also about apparitions of the living, dead, animals and objects. Their research provided a great deal of information about the phenomenology and correlates of the apparitional experience. Another area of survey research is examining how many people believe in the existence of ghosts. One of the most recent surveys was the Gallup Poll, where a telephone survey of 1,012 American adults revealed that 38 percent of the sample believed in the existence of ghosts. Trying to replicate an apparitional experience under laboratory conditions is difficult and problematical at best due to the spontaneous nature of the phenomena and the 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p117.83
experience under laboratory conditions is difficult and problematical at best due to the spontaneous nature of the phenomena and the ethical issues in performing research of this type. However, it is possible to place an individual into a “psychomanteum”, where they might have an apparitional experience. The term “psychomanteum” has been defined as, “spirits of the dead are summoned as a means of divination so that they can be asked questions about the future or other hidden knowledge.”55 However, in the laboratory the psychomanteum is a booth or chamber which has black curtains all around it. Inside the booth there is 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p118.01
laboratory the psychomanteum is a booth or chamber which has black curtains all around it. Inside the booth there is a comfortable chair and a mirror on one of the walls. The mirror is angled so that the person sitting in the chair cannot see their own reflection. A candle is normally placed behind the person to create subdued light. The individual then sits in the chair and relaxes, and begins to stare at the mirror. Some studies have found that over half of the participants who have been in the psychomanteum report experiencing the visual appearance of a deceased person,56 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p118.16
over half of the participants who have been in the psychomanteum report experiencing the visual appearance of a deceased person,56 and that this encounter can be very vivid and in different sensory modalities, with some participants being convinced that the person is there. This method can be helpful in the grieving process57 and the experience can be enhanced by the suggestion that the individual will see a deceased person. Sherwood has suggested that this experimental set up could result in the participant experiencing hypnogogic or hypnopomic imagery58, which might help to explain why, in Green and McCreery’s sample, approximately a quarter 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p118.32
participant experiencing hypnogogic or hypnopomic imagery58, which might help to explain why, in Green and McCreery’s sample, approximately a quarter of the apparitional experiences they analysed occurred when the witness was waking up.59 Field based Experiments Experiments that are based at a reportedly haunted location obviously lack the degree of control that is possible when an experiment is performed in the laboratory. However, by omitting or manipulating the information that participants receive, it is possible to uncover some of the psychological and environmental cues that make an individual more likely to have an apparitional experience. A key example of a field 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p118.47
and environmental cues that make an individual more likely to have an apparitional experience. A key example of a field based experiment was the experiment performed by Lange and Houran in a disused theatre which was mentioned earlier,60 but another example was the experiment conducted by Maher and Hansen.61 Their experiment involved taking a group of “sensitives” (those that felt they could sense an apparition) individually around a reportedly haunted residential building in New York City. Both groups were asked to note down where in the building they felt that a ghost might be. Maher and Hansen found no significant different 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p118.62
note down where in the building they felt that a ghost might be. Maher and Hansen found no significant different between the accuracy of the sensitives and skeptics guesses when comparing both groups to previously reported sightings.63 These field experiments are useful for further understanding the apparitional experience, but in these types of experiment very little attempt is made to find out what the cause of previous reports of apparitional experiences might be. “Ghost hunter” Type Investigations This is probably the most traditional form of research into apparitional experiences, and is also the best known. The techniques are reviewed by a 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p118.78
most traditional form of research into apparitional experiences, and is also the best known. The techniques are reviewed by a number of popular books,64 and a number of local and national organisations actively research cases in this manner. Although individual investigators have their own, distinctive styles, in general the investigation proceeds in the following order after the case has come to the attention of the investigators; initial interview of witnesses, visit the site of the experiences and examine it, take photographs and make a plan of the site, perform a thorough investigation of the site, including locations of any objects (e.g. 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p118.93
and make a plan of the site, perform a thorough investigation of the site, including locations of any objects (e.g. hidden pipes) that might offer a conventional explanation of the experiences. Then the investigation might extend to staying at the location during the day or overnight so that the investigators can witness the phenomena first hand. Different types of equipment might be used, such as cameras, camcorders, electromagnetic field measuring equipment, night vision goggles and flour (for footprints). The equipment and the procedure used often depend upon the types of hypotheses that the investigators might be examining. For example, if the 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p119.08
the procedure used often depend upon the types of hypotheses that the investigators might be examining. For example, if the investigators feel from the initial interview with the witnesses that the cause of the phenomena might be due to misinterpretation of conventional events on behalf of the occupiers, they might try to show how this might have happened. Unfortunately, investigations are rarely this straightforward. Because of the fact that spontaneous case investigations take place in the “real world” and not the laboratory, it is difficult for the investigators to limit the amount of variables that they are to measure and test, 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p119.23
laboratory, it is difficult for the investigators to limit the amount of variables that they are to measure and test, and it is therefore difficult to conclude anything definitive from a single case investigation, unless it has a very clear conventional explanation. This difficulty is further compounded by the fact that many cases are brought to the attention of investigators because the witnesses feel that the location is haunted by the spirit of a dead person. This means that the witnesses’ interpretation moderates their reported experience and their expectations of the findings of the investigators. This can potentially lead to an 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p119.38
interpretation moderates their reported experience and their expectations of the findings of the investigators. This can potentially lead to an ethical problem for the investigators if they find a conventional cause for the phenomena that the witnesses feel is comforting and paranormal in origin; do the investigators report their actual findings and risk upsetting the witness? Or do they lie and confirm the witnesses’ expectations? Do ghosts exist? – Summary and Conclusions This paper summarises only a fraction of the literature on researching apparitional experiences from a parapsychological perspective. However, it does present some of the difficulties in researching apparitional experiences. 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p119.53
on researching apparitional experiences from a parapsychological perspective. However, it does present some of the difficulties in researching apparitional experiences. Not only is the term “apparition” difficult to define, but also the fact that “ghost” and “apparition” are so easily associated with the spirit hypothesis creates further difficulties in trying to tease out the experience from the interpretation. Hopefully the problems and issues highlighted here will provide researchers who are examining material from the early modern period with more tools and a wider perspective. Interdisciplinary interactions are very useful, and hopefully parapsychologists and other researchers examining contemporary reports can learn a 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p119.68
a wider perspective. Interdisciplinary interactions are very useful, and hopefully parapsychologists and other researchers examining contemporary reports can learn a lot from the techniques that are used to research historical cases, such as the methods that are employed and the types of conclusions that can be drawn. This paper has highlighted the difficulty in answering the question, “Do ghosts exist?” People have apparitional experiences and appear to believe in the existence of ghosts, but there are other possible explanations apart from the spirit hypothesis for explaining the causes of these experiences. 	Early Modern Ghosts:  p119.83
four year longitudinal research programme investigating the effect of local geomagnetic field fluctuations and meditation on receptive psi has been initiated at a Tibetan monastery in Scotland. This Note is intended to give the theoretical background for this research programme. Research findings from several disparate disciplines have been synthesized into a model that can be used to understand associations of both environmental variables and a person’s state of consciousness with an individual’s performance in controlled psi tests. Initially a description of the evidence for both geomagnetic activity (GMA) and meditation 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p0
an individual’s performance in controlled psi tests. Initially a description of the evidence for both geomagnetic activity (GMA) and meditation relationships with psi is presented. Since Geomagnetic Activity exhibits variation by season, and possibly lunar phase, relationships between these cycles and psi are also considered. A theory that connects these variables is then presented, drawing on evidence that Geomagnetic Activity may affect the function of the pineal gland within the human brain, and research that suggests that the pineal gland may produce psi conducive neurochemicals. GEOMAGNETIC ACTIVITY The Link between the Sun and Geomagnetic Activity (GMA) to 66,000 nT; a value 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p0.23
produce psi conducive neurochemicals. GEOMAGNETIC ACTIVITY The Link between the Sun and Geomagnetic Activity (GMA) to 66,000 nT; a value of approximately 50,000 nT is typical at mid latitude locations such as the UK. There is a diurnal variation in the field of approximately 20 nT at mid latitudes, attributable to thermal and tidal currents in the ionosphere. The largest variations, however, are due to collisions between the Earth’s field and fast moving plasma (electrically charged gas) ejected from the Sun; these variations can reach approximately 250 nT at mid latitudes. These plasma ejections can be due to spectacular explosions on 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p0.49
these variations can reach approximately 250 nT at mid latitudes. These plasma ejections can be due to spectacular explosions on the sun, known as solar flares, which are most common at the peak of the sun’s approximately 11 year activity cycle, or they can be due to coronal holes, lower density areas of the sun’s atmosphere, that have ‘open’ 1An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 53rd Parapsychological Association Convention, Paris, 2010. magnetic field lines. Fluctuations in the geomagnetic field caused by these solar emissions are termed Geomagnetic Activity . A global index of GMA, ap, has commonly 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p0.76
geomagnetic field caused by these solar emissions are termed Geomagnetic Activity . A global index of GMA, ap, has commonly been used to quantify the degree of disturbance. This index is derived from the difference between the lowest and highest field measurements during a three hour period from each of 13 observatories around the globe. This index does a poor job, however, of representing the detailed characteristics of the field disturbance. There exist several classes of disturbance known as geomagnetic pulsations (alternatively termed ultra low frequency (ULF) activity); these fluctuations are classified by frequency (i.e., the number of waves per second), 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p1.01
(alternatively termed ultra low frequency (ULF) activity); these fluctuations are classified by frequency (i.e., the number of waves per second), and character: regular sinusoidal or irregular. The size of these pulsations tends to be related to their frequency, ranging at mid latitudes from 0.01 nT at the high end of the frequency spectrum to 10 nT at the low end . Disturbances at different frequencies have different source mechanisms; elucidation of the different processes involved in their generation is an active field of space research . For an extensive overview of the Earth’s magnetic field and GMA, the interested reader is 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p1.14
field of space research . For an extensive overview of the Earth’s magnetic field and GMA, the interested reader is referred to Campbell . The Link between Geomagnetic Activity and Psi For the past three decades, research in parapsychology has found evidence that psi is related to GMA. This research can be divided into laboratory versus spontaneous studies, and receptive psi (e.g., clairvoyance) versus active psi (e.g., psychokinesis (PK), healing). The first research into the link between spontaneous receptive psi and Geomagnetic Activity was by Schaut and Persinger . Examining cases from Ian Stevenson’s collection of cases , the Society for 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p1.26
Geomagnetic Activity was by Schaut and Persinger . Examining cases from Ian Stevenson’s collection of cases , the Society for Psychical Research case collection Phantasms of the Living , and Fate magazine’s collection , they reported that spontaneous telepathic impressions tended to occur on days of low GMA. Persinger considers that these correlations hold over decades as well as shorter time spans, there being some decades that have noticeably lower Geomagnetic Activity than others 1879 and 1890 Wilkinson and Gauld criticised this research for use of inappropriate statistical methods, in particular, failure to account for the skewed distribution of Geomagnetic Activity 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p1.39
this research for use of inappropriate statistical methods, in particular, failure to account for the skewed distribution of Geomagnetic Activity indices. They also analysed spontaneous case collections, including those used by Persinger, and did not find the above correlations. The first suggestion that the results of laboratory studies of receptive psi may be linked with Geomagnetic Activity was made by Adams , who found that ganzfeld and remote viewing success was greater during periods of low GMA. Makarec and Persinger analysed a forced choice card guessing experiment and found a similar relationship. Tart conducted two psi studies and reported that his 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p1.52
a forced choice card guessing experiment and found a similar relationship. Tart conducted two psi studies and reported that his results suggested that low Geomagnetic Activity on or immediately preceding the day of an experiment was associated with successful psi. Persinger and Krippner , analysing the Maimonides studies, again found that dream psi was stronger during periods of low GMA. Krippner and Persinger analysed a single dreamer over 20 nights and found that there was significantly higher dream psi scoring on nights of low GMA. Haraldsson and Gissurarson found no relationship between Geomagnetic Activity on the day of experiments and psi 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p1.65
nights of low GMA. Haraldsson and Gissurarson found no relationship between Geomagnetic Activity on the day of experiments and psi results, but reported that successful experiments tended to be carried out a day after high GMA. Spottiswoode analysed 305 remote viewing trials and found that success was greater during periods of low GMA. In a meta analysis of 51 studies comprising 2,879 free response trials, Spottiswoode reported only a marginally significant relationship between Geomagnetic Activity and psi effect size. The link between low Geomagnetic Activity and psi did not hold with Honorton’s database of 139 ganzfeld sessions , nor for the 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p1.77
between low Geomagnetic Activity and psi did not hold with Honorton’s database of 139 ganzfeld sessions , nor for the PEAR database of 334 precognitive remote perception trial . Radin found that animal psi research by Sheldrake showed an effect of GMA, in that the participating dog indicated greater awareness of when his owner was returning home on days of low GMA. From the foregoing it is clear that, most often, when a relationship between receptive psi and Geomagnetic Activity is reported, the correlation is negative; that is to say, psi is more successful when Geomagnetic Activity is low. Occasionally, however, 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p1.9
reported, the correlation is negative; that is to say, psi is more successful when Geomagnetic Activity is low. Occasionally, however, the opposite is reported. Radin, McAlpine and Cunningham found that although “normal” participants showed no evidence of psi, they scored better when Geomagnetic Activity was low, but “creative” participants, who did succeed in the ganzfeld sessions, showed stronger psi scoring when Geomagnetic Activity was high. In receptive psi experiments during which artificial complex fluctuating magnetic fields were generated near participants, both Persinger, Cook and Tiller and Booth, Charette and Persinger exhibited successful psi during high GMA. Hubbard and May have criticised 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p2.05
Persinger, Cook and Tiller and Booth, Charette and Persinger exhibited successful psi during high GMA. Hubbard and May have criticised research into the psi Geomagnetic Activity link for relying on global Geomagnetic Activity measurements, and have urged that local measurements are made. In line with this advice, Dalton and Stevens measured local field variations at Edinburgh and in an analysis of 97 ganzfeld sessions reported that psi was associated with high Geomagnetic Activity when using local measurements, but low Geomagnetic Activity (rs = when using the global ap index. However, using 1 minute measurements of the geomagnetic field from the same 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p2.27
(rs = when using the global ap index. However, using 1 minute measurements of the geomagnetic field from the same observatory (Eskdalemuir), Ryan found that psi was associated with low Geomagnetic Activity using both local and global measurements (rs = 0.20 and Ryan collated results from 343 ganzfeld and remote viewing sessions conducted within the UK and checked for correlations with local GMA, using Fourier transforms to condense 1 second field readings from local magnetometers into activity measurements within various frequency bands. He found that low frequency geomagnetic pulsations were in general associated with poor psi performance, whereas higher frequency pulsations 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p2.49
bands. He found that low frequency geomagnetic pulsations were in general associated with poor psi performance, whereas higher frequency pulsations were associated with enhanced psi performance. He suggested that these results may explain the inconsistent relationship between psi and GMA. The low frequency band correlates well with the global Geomagnetic Activity ap index and therefore this class of activity may explain the associations of psi with low Geomagnetic Activity that are most commonly reported. The high frequency band is generally uncorrelated, but occasionally positively correlated with the global Geomagnetic Activity ap index, 2Ryan re analysed this study and found a smaller 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p2.71
but occasionally positively correlated with the global Geomagnetic Activity ap index, 2Ryan re analysed this study and found a smaller but still significant effect . so this could account for the occasional contrary finding of an association of receptive psi with high GMA. Findings of a positive correlation of Geomagnetic Activity with psi, whilst unusual with receptive psi, seem to be the norm with spontaneous cases of bereavement hallucinations, hauntings and active psi laboratory research. In particular, research into spontaneous cases has found strong evidence that sudden increases in Geomagnetic Activity are associated with poltergeist , and haunting episodes . Persinger 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p2.93
has found strong evidence that sudden increases in Geomagnetic Activity are associated with poltergeist , and haunting episodes . Persinger also found that bereavement hallucinations occurred more frequently during days of high GMA. Persinger and Cameron suggested that local fluctuations in the geomagnetic field may be involved, as their poltergeist cases all occurred close to a geological fault line. Krippner, et al. reported a significant relationship between both local Geomagnetic Activity and the daily Southern Hemisphere Geomagnetic Activity index for the Southern Hemisphere, and apparent anomalous events that occurred in the presence of a Brazilian “sensitive”. Geomagnetic Activity was heightened on 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p3.12
Southern Hemisphere, and apparent anomalous events that occurred in the presence of a Brazilian “sensitive”. Geomagnetic Activity was heightened on those days when there were maximum anomalous events. This same relationship also holds with laboratory research into active psi. Braud and Dennis examined four sets of their biological psychokinesis data: spontaneous electrodermal activity, mental influence on electrodermal activity, rate of haemolysis of blood cells in vitro and mental influence on haemolysis rate. They found significant correlations for most of the measures, such that greater effects were shown on days of increased GMA. It may be that low Geomagnetic Activity is related 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p3.28
such that greater effects were shown on days of increased GMA. It may be that low Geomagnetic Activity is related to receptive psi and high Geomagnetic Activity to active psi, but it is not clear why bereavement hallucinations and haunting phenomena fall into the latter category. One possibility is that haunting phenomena may be closely related to poltergeist phenomena, which are normally considered to be a form of recurrent spontaneous psychokinesis. Both involve movement of objects, variations in air temperature, etc., including occasional reports of apparitions, which is the main feature of bereavement hallucinations. There is some discussion in parapsychology whether 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p3.45
including occasional reports of apparitions, which is the main feature of bereavement hallucinations. There is some discussion in parapsychology whether receptive and active psi is a unitary phenomenon or two different phenomena . Perhaps, by investigating more closely the effect of the different bands found in local GMA, the anomalies concerning the psi Geomagnetic Activity relationship sometime being positive and sometimes negative, can be clarified. Ryan’s hypotheses about the different effects being related to the different bands of Geomagnetic Activity can only be explored by looking at local GMA, thus reinforcing Hubbard and May’s concern over the use of global measurements. 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p3.62
only be explored by looking at local GMA, thus reinforcing Hubbard and May’s concern over the use of global measurements. The Link between Season and Psi Geomagnetic Activity is subject to pronounced seasonal variations, with the most intense disturbances tending to occur in the equinox months of March/April and September/October. Geomagnetic pulsations also vary by season, but these patterns are more complex and depend on pulsation frequency, latitude, time of day, and solar cycle phase . If psi is affected by GMA, one might expect to see a seasonal variation in the results of psi experiments. In an examination of 3,325 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p3.79
GMA, one might expect to see a seasonal variation in the results of psi experiments. In an examination of 3,325 free response receptive psi trials, Sturrock and Spottiswoode found exactly this, the main effect being a drop in psi effect size from late May to early July. Earlier, in his previous meta analysis, Spottiswoode had reported a relationship between receptive psi and local sidereal time (LST). LST is time measured relative to the stars: thus at the September equinox, local clock time and LST coincide, then LST recesses by approximately 4 minutes each day, until again coinciding with local time on 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p3.96
time and LST coincide, then LST recesses by approximately 4 minutes each day, until again coinciding with local time on the equinox of the September of the following year. At any given time of year, local daytime (when most psi experiments are conducted) will fall within a particular LST range, so if psi effect size varies by season, this will be reflected in a non uniform distribution of psi effect size by LST. Thus, a seasonal factor acting on psi must necessarily explain some, if not all, of the features of psi effect size by LST. Dalkvist and Westerlund were the 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p4.11
necessarily explain some, if not all, of the features of psi effect size by LST. Dalkvist and Westerlund were the first to suggest that Spottiswoode’s findings could be explained if performance was affected by a factor that varied by an interaction of time of day and time of year; i.e. a seasonal effect. In this respect, Spottiswoode’s LST findings can be regarded as primarily due to seasonal effects. The Link between the Moon and Psi An effect of the moon on Geomagnetic Activity has been suggested by various researchers. If this is the case, then apparent lunar phase effects on psi 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p4.25
Geomagnetic Activity has been suggested by various researchers. If this is the case, then apparent lunar phase effects on psi may in fact be attributable to GMA. As in the previous discussion regarding the effect of Geomagnetic Activity on psi, once again we see that both active and receptive psi are affected. With regard to receptive psi, in a series of telepathy tests, Puharich , found increased psi scores at full and dark moon periods, and when Krippner, Becker, Cavallo and Washburn analysed 80 dream sessions, they also noticed enhanced psi during the full moon period. Radin and Rebman found a 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p4.39
Washburn analysed 80 dream sessions, they also noticed enhanced psi during the full moon period. Radin and Rebman found a lunar correlation in their data of casino jackpot and lottery wins. Over a four year period there were 6 jackpot wins — all of them were during the full moon period. Other games also showed enhanced casino payout during the full moon period, with peak payout within one day of the full moon. There is no way of telling whether these were due to receptive or active psi! Researching active psi, Etzold evaluated 200,000 retro psychokinesis trials covering 8 years and 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p4.53
were due to receptive or active psi! Researching active psi, Etzold evaluated 200,000 retro psychokinesis trials covering 8 years and found significant relationships between both solar activity and lunar phase. In some periods retro psychokinesis results were above chance around the full moon period but during other periods the apparent effect was reversed. Sturrock and Spottiswoode’s analysis also suggested that there may be a relationship between psi performance and lunar phase; they found a peak of psi effect size at about twice the lunar synodic frequency. With regard to research linking lunar phase with GMA, there is evidence that the moon 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p4.67
twice the lunar synodic frequency. With regard to research linking lunar phase with GMA, there is evidence that the moon affects the intensity of the geomagnetic field via atmospheric tidal effects , but no influence on the global index of Geomagnetic Activity ap has been detected . However, it is possible that lunar effects may be more prominent in other components, such as pulsation classes, of Geomagnetic Activity Schneider hypothesised that the moon may interact with the magnetotail (the narrow, elongated area of the Earth’s magnetic field that extends away from the sun) during the full moon period, thereby modulating GMA. 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p4.81
area of the Earth’s magnetic field that extends away from the sun) during the full moon period, thereby modulating GMA. Etzold, suggested that this could be the mechanism behind the lunar influence on psi. The plausibility of this account seems questionable because the moon has no global magnetic field and thus one would imagine that the interaction between the moon and plasma streams is negligible . However recent observations from NASA’s Lunar Prospector spacecraft suggest that the moon may affect processes in the magnetotail at larger distances upstream than previously considered , so the question remains open. Distinguishing a lunar from 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p4.95
in the magnetotail at larger distances upstream than previously considered , so the question remains open. Distinguishing a lunar from a solar effect can be problematic because the interval between two successive lunar phases (the synodic period) of 29.5 days is close to the rate of solar rotation, which is approximately 27 days. As the sun is a gaseous body, its rotation varies by latitude and is fastest at the equator. In addition, features such as sunspots can shift in position from one rotation to the next. This can make it challenging to differentiate between solar and lunar effects, particularly when 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p5.12
from one rotation to the next. This can make it challenging to differentiate between solar and lunar effects, particularly when short periods are studied. THEORETICAL MODEL The Link between Geomagnetic Activity and the Pineal Gland Persinger , Roney Dougal and Roney Dougal and Vogl have all suggested that the Geomagnetic Activity relationship with psi might be connected with the pineal gland. In general, there is considerable empirical evidence that magnetic fields, both artificial and natural, can affect one’s state of consciousness in many ways. Randall and Randall found a relationship between natural magnetic disturbances caused by the solar wind and 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p5.3
consciousness in many ways. Randall and Randall found a relationship between natural magnetic disturbances caused by the solar wind and hallucinatory experiences. Fuller, Dobson, Wieser and Moser evoked epileptic type activity using magnetic fields, and Dobson, St. Pierre, Wieser and Fuller applied magnetic fields to epileptic patients which changed their brain wave patterns. Biogenic magnetite has been found in the brain, which might provide a basis both for its sensitivity to magnetic fields and a possible magnetic sense of direction Another potential effect of Geomagnetic Activity on brain activity is the control of chemical reactions within the brain through the coupling 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p5.48
potential effect of Geomagnetic Activity on brain activity is the control of chemical reactions within the brain through the coupling of weak low frequency magnetic fields at sub atomic levels . More specifically, Persinger’s studies have associated the temporal lobes with the interaction between magnetic fields and psi. He has shown that anomalous perceptions and impressions can be artificially induced by applying temporally complex, weak intensity (comparable to GMA) magnetic fields to the brain. Persinger found increased alpha activity over the left temporal lobe following exposure to weak artificial transcerebral magnetic fields in a dark room, and differential entrainment of EEG 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p5.67
left temporal lobe following exposure to weak artificial transcerebral magnetic fields in a dark room, and differential entrainment of EEG activity . These impressions increase if the individual has an increased susceptibility to temporal lobe epilepsy. Persinger’s theory is that the magnetic fields induce partial micro seizures in the temporal lobe regions and the hippocampus/amygdala area . This follows on from research by Roll who noticed the excess of poltergeist focus children who suffered from epilepsy or some other neurological problem. Neppe in his research into spontaneous cases noted a link between psi experience and temporal lobe sensitivity, and Persinger reported 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p5.85
Neppe in his research into spontaneous cases noted a link between psi experience and temporal lobe sensitivity, and Persinger reported that practitioners of Transcendental Meditation displayed increased partial epileptic type signs, which are related to the temporal lobes. The pineal gland is associated with the temporal lobes and limbic system. Persinger suggested a role for melatonin, which is made by the pineal gland, in his temporal lobe/limbic system hypothesis . There is also some tentative support for the melatonin psi hypothesis from dream ESP research that shows increased precognition test scores at 3:00 a.m., when melatonin is being produced, compared to 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p6.03
from dream ESP research that shows increased precognition test scores at 3:00 a.m., when melatonin is being produced, compared to 8:00 a.m. when there is, in general, lower melatonin production , although this effect was not replicated in a later study . Reiter and Richardson reviewed the evidence that magnetic fields depress melatonin production by the pineal gland and found that this occurs primarily at night. In more recent research, conducted in the arctic region, Weydahl, Sothern, Cornelissen and Wetterberg found that high Geomagnetic Activity reduced melatonin production and increased serotonin levels. Welker, Semm, Willig, Commentz and Wiltshchko suggest that it 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p6.21
that high Geomagnetic Activity reduced melatonin production and increased serotonin levels. Welker, Semm, Willig, Commentz and Wiltshchko suggest that it is the change in the intensity of the field which affects pineal functioning, rather than the overall level. Furthermore there is a window of magnetic field frequency, typically below 30Hz, which appears to be related to both pineal neural activity and psi type experiences induced by artificial magnetic fields . Thus, the suggestion is that, as artificial and natural magnetic fields can induce psi type experiences, and as spontaneous psi occurs in people with epilepsy and other temporal lobe sensitivity, that 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p6.38
can induce psi type experiences, and as spontaneous psi occurs in people with epilepsy and other temporal lobe sensitivity, that possibly the pineal gland is a mediator for a psi conducive state of consciousness being induced by changes in the magnetic field. This suggestion is supported by the formation in the pineal gland of psi conducive neurochemicals which are identical to those found in the psychedelic brew, ayahuasca, used by shamans in the Amazonian region. The Link between the Pineal Gland, Psychedelic Tryptamines and Psi Both Strassman and Roney Dougal suggest that some psychic, dreaming, psychotic and mystical states may occur 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p6.56
Psychedelic Tryptamines and Psi Both Strassman and Roney Dougal suggest that some psychic, dreaming, psychotic and mystical states may occur through the production of DMT and pinoline in the pineal gland. . Severi , Harvey Wilson, , McKenna, and Ring, have all noted the similarity between traditional psychedelic induced shamanic initiations that include DMT like substances, NDEs, alien abduction experiences, and heightened psychic sensitivity. Harmala alkaloids (chemically similar to pinoline) and DMT are both found in the Amazonian shamanic brew, Ayahuasca. Ayahuasca was traditionally used by shamans to induce out of body and psychic experiences, and for the shamanic healing ritual. 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p6.73
Ayahuasca was traditionally used by shamans to induce out of body and psychic experiences, and for the shamanic healing ritual. The anthropological and ethnobotanical literature is replete with examples of ostensibly paranormal phenomena occurring with the traditional use of psychoactive plants, particularly Ayahuasca . Commonly these plants are taken in a ritual context for the express purpose of accessing altered states conducive to clairvoyance, precognition, telepathy, out of body travel, psychic diagnosis, psychic healing, and spirit communication The common neurotransmitter serotonin is known to be most active in the pineal gland where it follows a circadian rhythm and is converted at 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p6.9
is known to be most active in the pineal gland where it follows a circadian rhythm and is converted at night into melatonin and pinoline, which Callaway suggests may regulate the dream cycle. MAO inhibiters, such as pinoline, possibly convert serotonin, with the aid of pineal enzymes, into the potent hallucinogens 5 MeO DMT, DMT, and bufotenine. In vivo biosynthesis of DMT might also occur through the conversion of the common, nutritionally essential, amino acid tryptophan . So it is possible that the pineal gland is involved in making neurochemicals which create a psi conducive state of consciousness particularly at night, 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p7.07
that the pineal gland is involved in making neurochemicals which create a psi conducive state of consciousness particularly at night, but also when there are changes in GMA. To summarise: the pineal gland produces neurochemicals which are identical with those found in a shamanic brew used specifically to induce spiritual, out of body and psychic experiences. In general, these are produced at night and are thought to be the stimulus for the dream state of consciousness. Reports of spontaneous precognitive experiences show that the majority occur at night and during dreams . Also, traditionally, mediums used to work in the dark 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p7.23
show that the majority occur at night and during dreams . Also, traditionally, mediums used to work in the dark and at night, so it could well be that this is a psi conducive period linked with the pineal gland’s production of pinoline and DMT. The pineal gland is influenced both by the night day cycle and by changes in GMA. Thus, geomagnetic fluctuations, originating from solar emissions and modulated by seasonal and lunar phase periods, may well be directly stimulating the pineal gland causing secretions of psi conducive neurochemicals. Further, it is interesting to note that yogic traditions consider the 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p7.4
the pineal gland causing secretions of psi conducive neurochemicals. Further, it is interesting to note that yogic traditions consider the pineal gland to be the physical aspect of ajna chakra, the third eye, which they consider to be the medium for psychic experiences. The Link between Meditation and Psi In the 1970s, Braud introduced the concept of the psi conducive state. This is a model which has driven much parapsychological research since then into altered states of consciousness as conducive to the experience of psi phenomena. The model states that psi functioning is enhanced when there is cortical arousal sufficient to 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p7.56
the experience of psi phenomena. The model states that psi functioning is enhanced when there is cortical arousal sufficient to maintain conscious awareness, muscular relaxation, reduction of sensory input, and focus on internal attention. In other words, when the receiver is in a state of sensory relaxation and is minimally influenced by ordinary perception. For more recent reviews of this concept see Braud , Roe and Holt, Simmonds–Moore, Luke and French . Around the same time Honorton was developing his model of internal attention states from his readings of the classic yoga text known as Patanjali’s sutras. These sutras state that 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p7.72
of internal attention states from his readings of the classic yoga text known as Patanjali’s sutras. These sutras state that when one attains samadhi the “siddhis” (psychic powers) manifest. In meditation there is internal and external noise reduction, and various psycho physiological correlates, such as EEG alpha rhythm and increased skin resistance, all of which have been found to be associated with greater psi scoring . Both Yogic and Buddhist teachings state that as one advances in meditation so psi phenomena start to occur. A more detailed review of this relationship is available in Roney Dougal , and a fuller discussion 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p7.88
start to occur. A more detailed review of this relationship is available in Roney Dougal , and a fuller discussion of Patanjali’s yoga sutras in relation to psi research has been given by Braud . Research into the effect of meditation suggests that it may indeed be a psi conducive state and increase receptive psi. This research started in the 1970s and in general found that post meditation scores were better than pre meditation, e.g., Schmeidler ; Dukhan and Rao ; Roll and Zill . At the same time a change in methodology occurred with the introduction of free response techniques. 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p8.04
Roll and Zill . At the same time a change in methodology occurred with the introduction of free response techniques. In these procedures the participant verbally described and/or drew their experience of the psi target prior to viewing the target. In other words, they attempted to become consciously aware of the target, in contrast to research which measures the physiological response of the participant to the target, or forced choice techniques where the person guesses the target from a fixed number of known potential targets, e.g., card symbols. A meta analysis of all the research by 1976 showed that overall there 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p8.18
of known potential targets, e.g., card symbols. A meta analysis of all the research by 1976 showed that overall there were 9 significant meditation psi experiments out of a total of 16, giving an overall p = 6x10 12 . Schmeidler , who summarised the research from 1978 1992, found that four out of the six studies reported during this period gave significant results. More recent research into the effect of meditation on receptive psi includes a ganzfeld study by Symmons and Morris , which found no difference between meditators and non meditators on accuracy of choosing the target. And in 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p8.33
and Morris , which found no difference between meditators and non meditators on accuracy of choosing the target. And in a study looking at subconscious physiological responses to a forthcoming target, known as the presentiment experiment, Radin, Vieten, Michel and Selorme found that advanced meditators with around 20 years of practice showed significant EEG responses before the stimulus was presented. The controls gave no significant prestimulus response. Most of the recent research has looked at the effect of meditation on active psi, which is not directly relevant to this review. However, the term meditation in all the studies mentioned so far 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p8.48
psi, which is not directly relevant to this review. However, the term meditation in all the studies mentioned so far has been used in a very loose way, since many different forms of meditation were practised including: mandala gazing, which is focusing attention on a specific type of picture; pranayama, which comprises a variety of breath techniques; kundalini yoga, which is primarily concentration on energy points called chakras and the energy channels between them; mantra yoga, which is sometimes known as transcendental meditation (TM) and is where certain words are repeated either mentally or out loud; and awareness techniques such as 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p8.62
transcendental meditation (TM) and is where certain words are repeated either mentally or out loud; and awareness techniques such as Zen meditation. Clearly, different techniques may result in different states of consciousness, and meditation research has been criticized for assuming that all meditation techniques are the same . A series of studies in India, working initially at an ashram with Yogis and then with Tibetan Buddhist monks Dougal, Solfvin & Fox, 2008; Roney strongly suggested that meditation is related to conscious psi awareness, in that meditators with more than 20 years of practice showed more consistent psi hitting on a receptive 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p8.77
psi awareness, in that meditators with more than 20 years of practice showed more consistent psi hitting on a receptive psi task compared with beginners; the correlation for the combined Tibetan studies was r = 0. 74, p = 0.0005, confirming that found in the yogic studies . This finding is in line with Yogic and Tibetan teachings, which state that the psi shown by an advanced practitioner is more reliable than the spontaneous psi exhibited naturally by psychics. These studies also looked at the type of meditation used in the psi sessions. In the ashram a kundalini technique called ajapajapa 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p8.92
also looked at the type of meditation used in the psi sessions. In the ashram a kundalini technique called ajapajapa was specifically used, as yogis consider that it stimulates the ajna chakra, the third eye and psychic centre. The final study with the Tibetans compared mantra meditation with visualisation. Whilst no difference was found in the actual sessions, years of practice with visualisation did show the strongest correlation with psi score , though this was not significant. On balance one can conclude that meditators are potentially a psi conducive population, and so it was decided to run the longitudinal study into 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p9.09
conclude that meditators are potentially a psi conducive population, and so it was decided to run the longitudinal study into the effect of Geomagnetic Activity on psi with people who had practiced Tibetan Buddhist meditation for a minimum of 10 years. Research suggests elevation of pineal function during meditation , but the potential connection between meditation, the pineal gland and Geomagnetic Activity will not be directly addressed in this study. Summary of the Theoretical Perspective We have seen that thirty years of research strongly suggests a link in various different ways between Geomagnetic Activity and psi experiences. However there are many 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p9.31
of research strongly suggests a link in various different ways between Geomagnetic Activity and psi experiences. However there are many anomalies in the findings and the cause of the relationship is still only partially explored. One possibility is that changes in the Geomagnetic Activity may affect the pineal gland to make endogenous neurochemicals which are similar to those used in shamanic rituals. There is strong evidence that the pineal’s activity is affected by GMA. Anthropological and neurochemical evidence points to the role of pinoline made in the pineal gland creating an endogenous Ayahuasca type hallucinogen. Amazonian shamans use Ayahuasca for psychic 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p9.53
role of pinoline made in the pineal gland creating an endogenous Ayahuasca type hallucinogen. Amazonian shamans use Ayahuasca for psychic purposes, which suggests that the pineal neurochemicals may be psi conducive. Yogis consider that meditation can affect one’s psi ability, and there are meditation techniques which specifically target ajna chakra, whose physical location is considered to be the pineal gland. Therefore, it is possible that one potential explanation for the psi conducive nature of meditation may related to activation of the pineal gland during the practice. These relationships are shown in Figure 1. Based on the model described here and illustrated 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p9.75
pineal gland during the practice. These relationships are shown in Figure 1. Based on the model described here and illustrated in Figure 1, a long term study is now underway to explore the effects of local Geomagnetic Activity on psi. One of the key aims of the proposed project is to replicate and extend the work of Ryan , by exploring the features of local Geomagnetic Activity that may modulate performance in receptive psi trials. The Geomagnetic Activity psi literature shows an anomaly in that on some occasions increased Geomagnetic Activity is related to psi and on others decreased Geomagnetic Activity 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p9.97
an anomaly in that on some occasions increased Geomagnetic Activity is related to psi and on others decreased Geomagnetic Activity is related to psi. This may be connected with differences between active or receptive psi – or it may be that investigating local Geomagnetic Activity where the different bands can be discriminated will resolve the anomaly. By gathering data from the same population over a four year period it will be possible to look at the effect of lunar, seasonal, and sunspot cycles on the Geomagnetic Activity psi correlation. The two main reasons for working with meditators is the evidence that 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p10.19
sunspot cycles on the Geomagnetic Activity psi correlation. The two main reasons for working with meditators is the evidence that they are a potentially psi conducive population, and the proximity of Samye Ling Tibetan Centre to Eskdalemuir Observatory, which is in the same valley. The Eskdalemuir Observatory is Britain’s first purpose built geological 11 Roney Dougal, Ryan and Luke Geomagnetic Activity and Psi: Literature Review and Theoretical Model observatory and gathers extremely high quality measurements of the geomagnetic field at a time resolution of 1 second. An initial two year study has been completed and will be submitted for publication in 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p10.41
time resolution of 1 second. An initial two year study has been completed and will be submitted for publication in due course. The primary hypotheses being tested in this study are that psi scoring will be related to the different frequencies (bands) of Geomagnetic Activity , and that psi scoring will be positively correlated with years of meditation practice. A number of other exploratory hypotheses are also being tested such as lunar and seasonal variations in psi and its relationship to temporal lobe lability, and the psychological effects of meditation. 	Geomagnetic Activity, Meditation and PSI:  p10.62
studies of “haunted houses” can offer ecologically valid insights for model building or theory formation in consciousness studies from parapsychological and conventional perspectives. The interactionist hypothesis asserts that these anomalous episodes are a phenomenon rooted in environmentperson bidirectional influences. Although prior research has examined the role of various physical factors in some haunt cases, relatively recent findings in environmental psychology suggest the potential involvement of six “Gestalt influences” that transcend discrete variables as conscious — or unconscious — stimulants of witness experiences. These meta patterns in the psychology of spaces or 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p64.01
variables as conscious — or unconscious — stimulants of witness experiences. These meta patterns in the psychology of spaces or settings involve: (i) affordance, (ii) atmosphere, (iii) ambiguity and threat anticipatory processes, (iv) immersion and presence, (v) legibility, and (vi) percipient memory and associations. Thus, haunted houses might be variants of “enchanted spaces or extraordinary architectural experiences.” New research designs are thus recommended to scrutinise the presence and impact of Gestalt influences and enactive processes in parapsychological contexts. Introduction “Haunted house” is a catchphrase for at least two types of ostensibly anomalous episodes, which we define in this paper from a 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p64.41
is a catchphrase for at least two types of ostensibly anomalous episodes, which we define in this paper from a phenomenological perspective . Poltergeist disturbances can be described in this context as clusters of unusual “psychological experiences” voices, and unusual somatic or emotional manifestations) and “physical events” mechanical equipment, and inexplicable percussive sounds like raps or knocks), that seemingly focus around the presence of certain people (for a Similar psychological and physical anomalies that tend to persist at specific locations are called haunts or hauntings . We emphasise that the haunted house moniker does not distinguish deliberately cultivated experiences of a 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p64.86
called haunts or hauntings . We emphasise that the haunted house moniker does not distinguish deliberately cultivated experiences of a religious, spiritual, or occult nature, e.g., hermeticism, spiritualism, or shamanism . However, some of these activities are certainly situated within the periphery of our main topic . We refer readers to Laythe, Laythe, and Woodward for an experimental example in this respect, and Houran et al. for similarities and differences in haunt narratives as a function of being spontaneous versus facilitated in nature. Furthermore, parapsychologists typically differentiate haunts and poltergeists or suggest they involve a constellation of different phenomena We argue, 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p65.15
in nature. Furthermore, parapsychologists typically differentiate haunts and poltergeists or suggest they involve a constellation of different phenomena We argue, however, that a firm distinction is problematic due to their overlapping characteristics and shared set of psychological and physical anomalies that form a unidimensional and probabilistic hierarchy . Thus, a common phenomenon or set of mechanisms might underlie both types of episodes. At the very least, haunted houses appear to be an interactionist phenomenon involving “the right people in the right settings” This view derives from systems theory, i.e., environmentperson bidirectional influences or what some authorities call enactive processes . Indeed, 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p65.35
settings” This view derives from systems theory, i.e., environmentperson bidirectional influences or what some authorities call enactive processes . Indeed, many studies hint that environmental factors contribute to the underlying mechanism(s) in haunt type cases. Mounting evidence suggests that: (i) the perception or report of haunt type experiences is related, in part, to vigilance or sensitivities to internal or external stimuli (ii) the contents of experiences often appear congruent with cues in the attending physical or psychosocial environment and (iii) patterns of the inter event times, or the temporal periods between successive anomalous experiences, strongly imply the role of perceptual or 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p65.56
of the inter event times, or the temporal periods between successive anomalous experiences, strongly imply the role of perceptual or attentional biases and “contagion” effects in some reports Therefore, beyond strictly parapsychological interpretations of haunted houses , their study seems instructive for exploring or refining important issues in consciousness studies that span model building or theory formation across the social and biomedical sciences. These implications touch on evolutionary perspectives on attentional or perceptual abilities, cognitive affective factors in the interpretation of ambiguous stimuli, causes and consequences of “sick building syndrome” and mass (contagious) psychogenic illness, as well as more recently introduced 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p65.77
ambiguous stimuli, causes and consequences of “sick building syndrome” and mass (contagious) psychogenic illness, as well as more recently introduced constructs such as embodied cognition , place attachment and identity , extraordinary architectural experiences , and hierotopy, i.e., the study of so called sacred or enchanted spaces . This conceptual paper thus calls for a broader approach that transcends simplistic studies of discrete physical factors that have typified fieldwork in this domain. Instead, relatively recent research and thinking in evolutionaryenvironmental psychology has identified several “Gestalt influences” that are especially pertinent to the phenomenon of haunted houses. This term, as used here, 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p65.97
has identified several “Gestalt influences” that are especially pertinent to the phenomenon of haunted houses. This term, as used here, refers to ambient, structural, or contextual variables that define or mediate a person’s cognitive affective “impression formation” of specific spaces and settings. Based on our review of this burgeoning literature, we outline and discuss six such influences. We further argue that fieldwork studies in parapsychology and anomalistic psychology should carefully consider these variables as part of new and innovative research designs. Haunted Houses as Environmental Science Environmental studies of haunted houses have often adopted two basic approaches. First, there are variables 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p66.17
Haunted Houses as Environmental Science Environmental studies of haunted houses have often adopted two basic approaches. First, there are variables that can capture attention and be interpreted as “ghostly.” Tandy and Lawrence provided a nice summary of these mostly conscious stimulants that included: “…water hammer in pipes and radiators (noises), electrical faults (fires, phone calls, video problems), structural faults (draughts, cold spots, damp spots, noises), seismic activity (object movement/destruction, noises), electromagnetic anomalies (hallucinations), and exotic organic phenomena (rats scratching, beetles ticking)” . Interestingly, these authors also reported that standing airwaves could elicit sensory experiences suggestive of ghosts — a conventional cause 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p66.36
. Interestingly, these authors also reported that standing airwaves could elicit sensory experiences suggestive of ghosts — a conventional cause not documented previously. Overviews and discussions of these and other naturalistic explanations are readily available Second, the literature references stimuli that can be unwittingly perceived or potentially instigate unusual experiences, i.e., unconscious (or nonconscious) stimulants. Pertinent to anomalistic psychology, for instance, an object within an individual’s line of sight but never mentioned can serve as an embedded cue or indirect suggestion for highly responsive hypnotic subjects . More generally, the extensive body of research on peripheral cues to persuasion show obvious 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p66.56
for highly responsive hypnotic subjects . More generally, the extensive body of research on peripheral cues to persuasion show obvious effects on belief and attitudes as a function of background and environmental information Other researchers have likewise proposed these types of embedded or “peripheral” cues in the environment as sources for the contents of some haunt related narratives . Nevertheless, expansive literature in evolutionary environmental psychology goes well beyond these two sets of perceptual stimulants or mediators. By way of explanation, environmental psychology is the scientific study of the transactions and interrelationships between people and their surroundings, including manufactured, social, natural, 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p66.75
environmental psychology is the scientific study of the transactions and interrelationships between people and their surroundings, including manufactured, social, natural, and virtual environments. Considerable evidence in this domain indicates that some ambient environmental conditions or physical variables can influence human sensory, attentional, or perceptual systems in unexpected or marked ways. For example, light emitting diodes (LED) seem to support positive mood, extended wakefulness, and speeded performance in workplace settings , whereas exposure to a specific colour called “Baker Miller Pink” ostensibly reduces human hyper excitability and aggression, even in colour blind and some blind individuals . These types of effects exemplify 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p66.95
reduces human hyper excitability and aggression, even in colour blind and some blind individuals . These types of effects exemplify the concepts of evidence based art and design. Early pioneering works launched this growing research area in concert with the patient centred care movement that began in the United States in 1978. For instance, Ulrich observed that surgical patients with windows overlooking natural scenes had shorter hospital stints and took fewer analgesic painkillers than patients in rooms with windows facing the brick walls of a neighbouring building. Related applications of environmental psychology (sometimes called environmental psychophysiology) have become increasingly popular in 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p67.13
brick walls of a neighbouring building. Related applications of environmental psychology (sometimes called environmental psychophysiology) have become increasingly popular in wellness — and hospitality settings derive from the premise that “the physical environment is not a mere backdrop for healthcare delivery — it is an integral part of the healthcare experience” . Clinical studies in this context have also found that the incorporation of visual arts and aesthetic design can enhance both patient wellness and staff efficiency by increasing positive feelings and reflective curiosity, which collectively result in patients’ spiritual and therapeutic wellness (for a review, Businesses that design or manage 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p67.31
and reflective curiosity, which collectively result in patients’ spiritual and therapeutic wellness (for a review, Businesses that design or manage stores or community spaces have similarly studied and applied so called biophilic design to capitalise on the hypothesised tendency for people innately to seek out connections with nature or naturalistic features . Sometimes witnesses in ghostly episodes have likewise referenced positive emotions, sensations, or perceptions especially when anomalies occur in the comforting or adaptive context of spontaneous or facilitated “after death communications” or within settings appreciated as sacred or enchanted spaces . But often something to the contrary occurs in putative 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p67.49
communications” or within settings appreciated as sacred or enchanted spaces . But often something to the contrary occurs in putative haunts. Based on our various field investigations and spontaneous case reviews, we instead find that specific buildings, locations, areas, or settings consistently stoke witness perceptions or reactions that range in tone from “quite surprising” to “somewhat unsettling” to “downright ominous.” It is easy to assume that such environments possess a stereotypical spookiness or creepiness . However, fieldwork studies suggest there are important nuances or interactions between human psychology and the overt or covert environmental cues or variables potentially at play. Some 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p67.67
important nuances or interactions between human psychology and the overt or covert environmental cues or variables potentially at play. Some studies , for instance, have found that specific areas in haunted houses where witnesses recurrently report anomalous experiences tend not to be those areas that independent raters perceive as having the “spookiest” ambience. On this point, the fields of neuroscience and architecture are actively investigating how built environments likewise influence perception. Undoubtedly, elements of a building or space exert an underlying influence, as noted by architect Peter Zumthor , “I enter a building, see a room and — in the fraction 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p67.85
influence, as noted by architect Peter Zumthor , “I enter a building, see a room and — in the fraction of a second — have this feeling about it” . Experimental evidence supports this premise that certain cognitiveaffective responses derive from discrete characteristics of built environments or controlled settings. Illustratively, low ceiling height and low natural light can trigger stress , as can open spaces . Higher ceiling height is more likely to elicit free and abstract thoughts, whereas low ceiling height tends to prompt thoughts to be focused on specific objects in a room Even insipid built features can cause 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p68.03
height tends to prompt thoughts to be focused on specific objects in a room Even insipid built features can cause individuals to become stressed , although more interesting or appealing settings are known to elicit feelings of peace and contemplation . Moreover, environmental psychologists have also discussed meta patterns of spaces or settings that foster more holistic or Gestalt perceptions or reactions in certain experients. Such impressions become complicated, as the very nature of “the whole being greater than the sum of its parts” inherently detracts from the scientific analysis of individual features of themes if these architectural themes are truly “Gestalt.” 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p68.21
its parts” inherently detracts from the scientific analysis of individual features of themes if these architectural themes are truly “Gestalt.” Nevertheless, and as the current work shows, detailed environmental analysis of “haunted locations” from spatial or visual perspectives are generally lacking. Hence, we assert that these Gestalt influences are conceptually germane to the topic of haunted houses and that a working knowledge of these patterns will bolster the validity and comprehensiveness of future fieldwork investigations. Environmental “Gestalt Influences” Considerable evidence shows that environmental and architectural experience and meaning can be predicted to an extent by the collective features of physical settings. 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p68.39
that environmental and architectural experience and meaning can be predicted to an extent by the collective features of physical settings. Here, people’s sensory, perceptual, and attentional mechanisms interact to produce holistic interpretations of certain natural or built environments. We describe these effects as “Gestalt influences,” and the environmental psychology literature contains six examples that appear particularly germane to the concept of haunted houses. Affordance Academic attention has increasingly focused on the concept of affordance. This is defined as “a possibility for action” provided by the environment or, alternatively, the relation possible between the environment and its percipient . A chair, for 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p68.57
action” provided by the environment or, alternatively, the relation possible between the environment and its percipient . A chair, for example, affords sitting. Neither the chair nor the person sitting is the affordance; they share the affordance, i.e., the possibility of sitting. Similarly, a door affords the possibility of passing through, while a staircase affords the possibility of ascending or descending . Within this framework, the “atmosphere” or “potential” of a space (based on whatever elements are contained in or define the space) can be considered an affordance for a feeling arising in a percipient Affordance, as defined here, reiterates the 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p68.74
the space) can be considered an affordance for a feeling arising in a percipient Affordance, as defined here, reiterates the powerful influence of both perceived meaning and action in architectural spaces that is reminiscent of the phenomenology of Heidegger in the sense that the person and object engage in an interaction of meaning. Simply put, something as commonplace as a creaky door must first be tangibly present in order for a percipient to see it move in a purportedly mysterious way. Subsequently, however, the beliefs or meaning associated with the location or object figure heavily in the interaction. It is also 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p68.92
Subsequently, however, the beliefs or meaning associated with the location or object figure heavily in the interaction. It is also worth noting that “spooky” objects or features within settings not only contribute to affordance but embed meaning in the type of feelings experienced in allegedly haunted spaces. This is by no means a revelation, as “hauntrepeneur” sites purposefully decorate locations for this specific effect . Similarly, rooms designed for séances using objects with cultural associations to hauntings or flashlights) are not only expected to generate moods and expectancies, but they also likely encourage paranormal interpretations by acting as embedded or peripheral 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p69.1
only expected to generate moods and expectancies, but they also likely encourage paranormal interpretations by acting as embedded or peripheral cues for most lay people. Atmosphere Atmosphere can be defined as “a state of resonance and identification (sensorimotor, emotive, and cognitive) between an individual and the surrounding built space.” Architectural features such as form, proportions, rhythm, materials, light and shade, temperature, and sounds are generators of atmosphere, such that feelings will be elicited in human percipients “when they interiorly establish an embodied simulation” of those features To this catalogue of elements can be added colours, textures, smells, and movement. These “induce 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p69.29
embodied simulation” of those features To this catalogue of elements can be added colours, textures, smells, and movement. These “induce the brain to react, generating a specific emotional state” . Taking sound as an example, old buildings full of rotting wood, exposed ductwork, and other structural defects can produce infrasound and create the possibility of a “spooky” experience for the percipient As studies in neuroscience, architecture, and environmental psychology progress in illuminating the impact of space and built features on perception and emotion, it becomes ever more clear that the spaces that surround us, shelter us, and provide us with a 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p69.47
and emotion, it becomes ever more clear that the spaces that surround us, shelter us, and provide us with a place to work, relax, and grow are more than structures. To this point, Winston Churchill memorably observed, “We shape our buildings and afterwards our buildings shape us” . In all cases, the sense of being in a set of surroundings is built on automatic, pre conscious processing. Input from the senses (including the proprioceptive and vestibular senses) serves to continuously update one’s neural representation of the body’s configuration and posture, its position and movement in space, and the possibilities for action 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p69.66
one’s neural representation of the body’s configuration and posture, its position and movement in space, and the possibilities for action in that space Indeed, it is argued broadly that our very sense of self arises from and is reinforced by continuous interaction with the external environment . Reactions to Ambiguity A parallel hypothesis concerning how feelings arise from built environments relates to the role of a percipient’s anticipatory processes, i.e., a kind of risk assessment performed unconsciously in order to make sense of the immediate environment, and hence, a process that might engender a physiological stress reaction, or, alternatively, feelings of 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p69.84
sense of the immediate environment, and hence, a process that might engender a physiological stress reaction, or, alternatively, feelings of comfort and ease . This pre conscious risk assessment can be seen most clearly in the case of reportedly haunted locations. According to McAndrew , “From a psychological point of view, the standard features of haunted houses creep us out because they exploit evolved psychological mechanisms that warn us of potential danger and motivate us to proceed with caution.” McAndrew and Koehnke’s Threat Ambiguity Theory asserts that the sense of “creepiness” is a response to the ambiguity of threat. Certain people, 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p70.02
Koehnke’s Threat Ambiguity Theory asserts that the sense of “creepiness” is a response to the ambiguity of threat. Certain people, for example, present us with an ambiguity as to whether they are to be feared. This ambiguity generates discomfort, which leads to those individuals being labelled as creepy. Applied to the present context, “Houses that send signals of being haunted give us the creeps not because they pose a clear threat to us, but rather because it is unclear whether or not they represent a threat . It is this ambivalence which leaves one “frozen in place, wallowing in unease” . 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p70.18
not they represent a threat . It is this ambivalence which leaves one “frozen in place, wallowing in unease” . The reason threat ambiguity elicits such an emotional response is traced to the agent detection mechanisms referenced by evolutionary psychologists , e.g.: Agent detection mechanisms are processes that have evolved to protect us from harm at the hands of predators and enemies. If you’re walking through the woods alone at night and hear the sound of something rustling in the bushes, you will respond with a heightened level of arousal and attention. You will behave as if there is a willful 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p70.34
you will respond with a heightened level of arousal and attention. You will behave as if there is a willful “agent” present who is about to do you harm. If it turns out to be a gust of wind or a stray cat, you lose little by overreacting. But if you fail to activate the alarm response and a true threat is present — well, the cost of your miscalculation could be high. Thus, we evolved to err on the side of detecting threats in ambiguous situations . Our agency detection system is undoubtedly operating in locations with ambiguous stimuli such 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p70.5
of detecting threats in ambiguous situations . Our agency detection system is undoubtedly operating in locations with ambiguous stimuli such as drafts, cold spots, rattling and creaking noises, echoes, etc. The resulting feeling of unease or fear can easily lead to specific settings or places being labelled as “haunted” just as a person would be labelled as “creepy.” The presence of life like dolls, sombre portraits of individuals long dead, heirlooms and other such objects can increase the perceived creepiness of a space . The converse also appears to be true, with creepiness affecting the perception of ambient temperature. In one 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p70.66
a space . The converse also appears to be true, with creepiness affecting the perception of ambient temperature. In one study, individuals who felt “creeped out” felt colder themselves and believed that the room temperature had dropped when, in fact, it had not McRobbie, Ambiguity and uncertainty have been frequently linked to anomalous experiences, and ghostly episodes specifically, in the literature (see e.g., Experients in such circumstances may try to exert control; this unconscious process can result in their seeing or attributing patterns or agency where none exist. In other words, when individuals are unable to gain a sense of control 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p70.82
attributing patterns or agency where none exist. In other words, when individuals are unable to gain a sense of control (physical or psychological) objectively, they will often try to gain it perceptually Hungry people, for instance, are more likely to perceive food in ambiguous images while children of lower economic status tend to overestimate the size of coins . In locations whose features generate uncertainty or apprehension, percipients may seek a feeling of control via illusory pattern perception or ideological driven interpretations of ambiguous stimuli. Here the ambiguous subsequently becomes the anomalous. That is, individuals who claim to live in a 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p70.98
interpretations of ambiguous stimuli. Here the ambiguous subsequently becomes the anomalous. That is, individuals who claim to live in a haunted location may perceive or interpret certain patterns that amount to a “ghost” in order to ease the uncertainly of ambiguous stimuli (psychological or physical) encountered there. This anxiety relieving process may typify what is happening in any purportedly haunted locale For example, Lange and Houran’s (1998, path analyses empirically modelled paranormal belief and experience in haunt related contexts as fundamentally adaptive, non pathological “delusion like” ideations (for overviews, see Houran & Williams, 1998; Lange These beliefs, in the absence of 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p71.16
adaptive, non pathological “delusion like” ideations (for overviews, see Houran & Williams, 1998; Lange These beliefs, in the absence of clear or convincing orthodox explanations, give people a sense of relief or control when confronting stressful or ambiguous stimuli. Lange and Houran’s anxiety relief (anxiolytic) model, however, pointed up important nuances. Paranormal beliefs appeared to reduce low to mild fears and anxieties associated with facing ambiguous stimuli, thereby creating a negative (self correcting) feedback loop . Yet, this strategy was less effective when people were already highly anxious or fearful. In these instances, paranormal ideations instead increased fear, thus creating a 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p71.33
effective when people were already highly anxious or fearful. In these instances, paranormal ideations instead increased fear, thus creating a positive (self reinforcing) feedback loop . Taken together, these findings suggest that people face a basic choice between fear of an unknown and an esoteric explanation for an unknown. The results of advanced nonlinear analyses that used this juxtaposition as the dependent variable supported this hypothesis . Still, tolerance of ambiguity is probably not the sole psychological variable mediating cognitive affective mechanisms linked to Anxiolytic or Threat Ambiguity Theory. O’Keeffe et al. proposed, for instance, that agency detection might also be 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p71.51
mechanisms linked to Anxiolytic or Threat Ambiguity Theory. O’Keeffe et al. proposed, for instance, that agency detection might also be affected by an experient’s aberrant salience or the proximity of the ambiguous/anomalous stimuli relative to the experient’s personal space. Finally, note that Anxiolytic and/or Threat Ambiguity Theory emphasises intolerance of ambiguity. But Lange and Houran found that a marked tolerance of ambiguity also correlated with paranormal interpretations for ambiguous stimuli. This observation might imply that such individuals regard “ghostly” phenomena with curiosity, amusement, or enchantment. Rather than inducing fear or anxiety in those with a high tolerance of ambiguity, anomalous experiences might 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p71.69
amusement, or enchantment. Rather than inducing fear or anxiety in those with a high tolerance of ambiguity, anomalous experiences might inspire feelings of admiration, awe, or wonder — akin to the experiences of some artists . In this manner, ambiguity and the related potential for psychological arousal may help to explain previous research associating sensation seekers with paranormal belief . Immersion and presence The constancy of human beings’ unconscious threat detection system can be demonstrated even in virtual environments. In several experiments, the degree to which the virtual space seemed real — and posed a threat offering no ready refuge) — 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p71.87
experiments, the degree to which the virtual space seemed real — and posed a threat offering no ready refuge) — generated stress as measured by heart rate, skin conductance, and skin temperature . Interestingly, in the virtual reality literature, the term presence occurs often. It refers to the degree of immersion in the virtual environment, i.e., the extent to which the percipient believes herself or himself to be physically present in that environment . Presence can be gauged by the individual’s psychophysiological and neurophysiological responses, including, of course, behaviour. While there is no overt connection in the anomalistic psychological or parapsychological 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p72.05
psychophysiological and neurophysiological responses, including, of course, behaviour. While there is no overt connection in the anomalistic psychological or parapsychological literature concerning presence, the reference and concept are worth exploring. Given that a higher level of presence is associated with greater activation of feelings , it seems possible that psi influences — more virtual than real — could evoke feelings and behavioural changes as well. The concept of presence as immersion is germane to social science and particularly parapsychological studies. The standard for persuasion research, the Elaboration Likelihood Model , separates persuasive content into “central” (direct and attenuated information) versus “peripheral” 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p72.24
standard for persuasion research, the Elaboration Likelihood Model , separates persuasive content into “central” (direct and attenuated information) versus “peripheral” (indirect or contextual information) where the strongest persuasive effect is determined by the personal relevance or salience of both forms of stimulus . Further, Self Categorization Theory empirically demonstrates the role of environmentally salient cues in whichever identity one uses for any given interaction. SCT emphasises “normative fit,” whereby individuals cognitively assess environmental, social, and visual cues to determine the group they wish to belong — a process that inevitably relates to schema formation and stereotypes Although not often operationalised, the 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p72.43
they wish to belong — a process that inevitably relates to schema formation and stereotypes Although not often operationalised, the immersion (i.e., focus or attention) of a psi experiment participant or field researcher would be expected to affect significantly their perceptions . Attention detracting and attention attracting environments could readily influence perception, and thus the results or observations. However, such environmental effects were notably absent in a cursory examination of the methodology sections in the Handbook of Parapsychology Clavertz, We might posit, therefore, that the level of “presence” in a given space is likely to affect what people observe and how 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p72.62
posit, therefore, that the level of “presence” in a given space is likely to affect what people observe and how they react there. Legibility and the Lens of “Para Design” Environmental or architectural features that can cause a location to be perceived as attractive or frightening are related, in part, to the qualities of physical space called prospect and refuge . Appealing locations offer prospect (clear, unobstructed views) and refuge (protective places to hide); locations with little or no prospect and refuge are perceived as unappealing, unsafe, or even dangerous Purportedly haunted locations might also tend to lack what environmental psychologists 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p72.81
refuge are perceived as unappealing, unsafe, or even dangerous Purportedly haunted locations might also tend to lack what environmental psychologists refer to as legibility, i.e., the ease with which a place can be recognised, organised into a pattern, and then recalled. A place with high legibility is one in which individuals can wander around without becoming lost , whereas “…the typical Hollywood haunted house is our worst nightmare, as it makes fleeing difficult. The darkness and confusing layout of the house may cause us to get lost; at the very least, it would slow us down” . Spatial features such as 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p73
may cause us to get lost; at the very least, it would slow us down” . Spatial features such as corners and recesses, low or narrowing ceilings, and other irregularities make such places perceptually challenging and, subsequently, disquieting Besides affording a low degree of legibility, allegedly haunted places are often older buildings with period furnishings that convey a sense of habitation or presence, even if long gone. Personal belongings or mementoes associated with the individuals who lived there can transmit an even more immediate sense of presence . Furthermore, these older structures are places where terrible things are said to have 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p73.17
even more immediate sense of presence . Furthermore, these older structures are places where terrible things are said to have happened, with the implication that some “residue” of the events remains. Such narratives can be personally compelling and socially engaging . These structures “…place us on our highest alert, and when combined with hazards that have threatened humans from the dawn of time, will creep us out every time” . Given the many factors contributing to percipients’ discomfort in “spooky” built environments, it is noteworthy that the term para design has been coined for the aim of making “general lived space 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p73.35
environments, it is noteworthy that the term para design has been coined for the aim of making “general lived space more comfortable by acknowledging features that may give rise to unpleasant feelings and sensations” . Para design seeks to comprehend ghostly perceptions through the lens of the built environment — and alleviate such discomfort through appropriate design modifications. This fresh tactic differs markedly from religio cultural “cleansing” rituals that are occasionally used as invention strategies for haunted houses . Percipient memory and associations One additional element deserves mention as affecting perception of place — memory. Consider the instance of a woman 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p73.52
and associations One additional element deserves mention as affecting perception of place — memory. Consider the instance of a woman who went into her bathroom at work and was immediately reminded of her high school biology class. The culprit was a trace smell of formaldehyde, a glue used in the bathroom’s cabinetry . Anthropologists Ember and Ember advanced a similar accounting for ghosts: There are many cues in everyday experience that are associated with a loved one, and even after…death those cues might arouse the feeling that the dead person is still somehow present. The opening of a door, the smell 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p73.7
cues might arouse the feeling that the dead person is still somehow present. The opening of a door, the smell of tobacco or cologne in a room, may evoke the idea that the person is still present, if only for a moment. Then, too, loved ones live on in dreams. Small wonder, then, that most societies believe in ghosts . These examples illustrate that memory is thoroughly embodied, reflecting our experience in certain places and at particular times — especially if these locations and times have personal meaning . Individuals may clearly be misled in the present by a sensation or 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p73.87
these locations and times have personal meaning . Individuals may clearly be misled in the present by a sensation or feeling relating to an earlier experience. Of course, from a parapsychological perspective, it is fair to question whether someone else’s earlier experience could be conveyed in a specific space via its built features and affordances of feeling. Bell has pointed out that, in a more prosaic way, “places are personed” — we can gain a sense of the individuals who frequented particular locations even when they are no longer physically present (nor even alive any longer). Language is interesting here since 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p74.04
particular locations even when they are no longer physically present (nor even alive any longer). Language is interesting here since common parlance ascribes a place that is or was intimately connected with a given person as his or her “haunt.” Bell argues that the term “ghost” is apt to describe this sense of presence (although he does not subscribe to a literal belief in ghosts). For Bell, ghosts — “that is, the sense of the presence of those who are not physically there — are a ubiquitous aspect of the phenomenology of place.” They are “a felt presence…that possesses and gives 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p74.21
physically there — are a ubiquitous aspect of the phenomenology of place.” They are “a felt presence…that possesses and gives a sense of social aliveness to a place” . In this manner, what he terms ghosts are “spirits of temporal transcendence, of connection between past and future.” When a person rearranges the furniture he or she has inherited in a given home or office, or installs new lighting or flooring, or gives away the older items in that space, that person is effectively ‘exorcising’ the space, dismissing the ghosts of previous occupants and imbuing the space with a new ghost — 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p74.37
is effectively ‘exorcising’ the space, dismissing the ghosts of previous occupants and imbuing the space with a new ghost — one’s own . Ultimately, says Bell, given that each place has “quirky singularities” and hosts a unique cast of characters, its atmosphere or character is bound to be unique. Ghosts, therefore, “have good reason to haunt the specific places they do” . Implications for Model Building and Theory Formation Potential refinements to current thinking Our review offers a new prism with which to re examine and possibly reinterpret previous studies that have implicated anomalous “localised” or ambient factors operating in haunted 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p74.54
which to re examine and possibly reinterpret previous studies that have implicated anomalous “localised” or ambient factors operating in haunted houses. That is, Gestalt influences might help to contextualise or explain results from various fieldwork studies using Gertrude Schmeidler’s quantitative “floorplan” approach. Specifically, she innovated a method whereby experimentally blind “sensitives” (self described psychics) and later control groups visited reportedly haunted sites and marked floorplans where they perceived anomalous phenomena. Significant associations were obtained between the areas marked by the sensitives and the areas indicated by previous witnesses. Additional studies using this methodology have reported similar correspondence effects 2002; Maher, 2000; 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p74.7
and the areas indicated by previous witnesses. Additional studies using this methodology have reported similar correspondence effects 2002; Maher, 2000; Maher & Hansen, 1992, 1995; Wiseman et al., 2002; for a meta analysis see: Maher, 1999 and for counterpoints on meta analytic Table 1 outlines key methodological details of published studies using the floorplan approach. It becomes clear that while this literature often reports intriguing associations between areas where prior witnesses and independent raters reported anomalous experiences, there are also many critical inconsistencies or gaps across the procedures and measurements: (i) the instruction sets for research participants, and hence the matching 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p74.87
critical inconsistencies or gaps across the procedures and measurements: (i) the instruction sets for research participants, and hence the matching attentional or perceptual exercises, often varied substantially across studies; (ii) no psychometric studies were conducted of prior witnesses in the respective cases to estimate their receptivity to environmental variables or Gestalt influences possibly operating in their spontaneous experiences; (iii) authors often categorized their research participants using nominal versus standardized (psychometric) criteria; with only 22% of the studies using psychometric measures that might estimate participants’ receptivity to environmental variables or Gestalt influences; (iv) about 56% of these studies measured some type of 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p78.04
might estimate participants’ receptivity to environmental variables or Gestalt influences; (iv) about 56% of these studies measured some type of discrete environmental variables, and (v) only 33% of these studies apparently measured, to an extent, elements relevant to Gestalt type effects. Given that the psychological characteristics of participants were not controlled for, and environmental cues were not uniformly operationalised, alternative hypotheses for the floorplan findings must be explored. Schmeidler’s floorplan approach has undeniably made a positive contribution to model building, i.e., it seemingly demonstrates an empirical “focusing” effect whereby the anomalous experiences of witnesses and some independent research participants are consistently localized 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p78.22
seemingly demonstrates an empirical “focusing” effect whereby the anomalous experiences of witnesses and some independent research participants are consistently localized to certain target areas (or “hot spots”) within haunted houses. However, key shortcomings in prior applications undermine the results for theory formation, i.e., understanding (or for ruling out competing explanations) why the experiences of witnesses and participants exhibit ostensible focusing effects. Simply put, we do not know to what stimuli the various witnesses and participants were attending or interpreting, as well as whether agreement among independent raters reflects individual differences in attentional or perceptual capabilities and if these perhaps related to 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p78.4
as whether agreement among independent raters reflects individual differences in attentional or perceptual capabilities and if these perhaps related to ambient or architectural features of the respective physical settings. Therefore, it can be argued that previous results from floorplan approaches are uninterpretable without critical contextual information from environmental psychology and witness psychology. The “Occam’s Razor” dictum would argue that, until they are controlled for, the Gestalt influences as reviewed here are more appropriate mechanisms to contemplate compared to merely invoking anomalous or parapsychological agencies. Suggestions for future directions The preceding ideas can usefully guide future research. For example, we can revisit 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p78.58
or parapsychological agencies. Suggestions for future directions The preceding ideas can usefully guide future research. For example, we can revisit issues of reliability and validity in the floorplan approach via some selective refinements and improvements that specifically address theory formation. The goal is to test more robustly the idea of haunts as interactions between the “right people in the right settings,” with the corresponding hypothesis that certain psychological traits characterise the “right people” and specific physical variables or Gestalt influences describe the “right settings.” Figure 1 draws on our review to show one example of an empiricallytestable model for the presumed 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p78.76
the “right settings.” Figure 1 draws on our review to show one example of an empiricallytestable model for the presumed interactionist effect. This highly simplified depiction draws on Jelic´ et al.’s enactive approach to architectural experience. Here, an anomalistic environmental perspective might predict that: • Target areas within “haunted houses” (or other sacred or enchanted spaces) contain a greater number or intensity of discrete physical variables and/or “Gestalt infl uences” than control areas. • Prior witnesses and independent research participants (showing correspondence effects in fl oorplan exercises) share an “encounter prone” perceptual personality profi le that also increases receptivity to certain 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p78.94
correspondence effects in fl oorplan exercises) share an “encounter prone” perceptual personality profi le that also increases receptivity to certain environmental features. This profi le purportedly involves hypervigilance or heightened sensitivity to internal and external stimuli as well as biases in the attentional or interpretational mechanisms related to anomalous experiences, i.e., paranormal belief, ideology, ambiguity tolerance, or aberrant salience . Of course, research designs can be modifi ed to test or control for a wide array of physical and psychological variables related to these or similar hypotheses. Readers might challenge this approach for poltergeist like cases that feature physical anomalies, which 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p79.31
related to these or similar hypotheses. Readers might challenge this approach for poltergeist like cases that feature physical anomalies, which would seem immune to Gestalt infl uences. Yet, we do not automatically discount potential associations in this respect. Recall that psychological experiences and physical events that are characteristic of haunted houses conform to a one factor model . This implies that physical and psychological anomalies are qualitatively different expressions of a core construct and should be affected by the same causal variables. For instance, expectancy suggestion effects have been correlated with poltergeist like manifestations, not merely anomalous psychological experiences This reasoning 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p79.75
variables. For instance, expectancy suggestion effects have been correlated with poltergeist like manifestations, not merely anomalous psychological experiences This reasoning suggests that a connection might exist between Gestalt influences and the perception or report of physical anomalies in some cases. Researchers must explore these types of empirical questions to determine the veracity of the present ideas for understanding haunt type episodes. To be sure, opportunities to conduct experimental proofs of conventional theories have been rare and not always convincing. Placing Schmeidler’s floorplan approach within a clearer and more rigorous evolutionary environmental framework should accordingly help to (i) bolster the internal validity 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p80.08
floorplan approach within a clearer and more rigorous evolutionary environmental framework should accordingly help to (i) bolster the internal validity of parapsychological studies in this domain and (ii) support or expand orthodox biomedical and social science studies that aim to conduct competitive hypothesis testing related to embodied cognition in naturalistic settings (cf. Quantifying the intensity of experients’ accounts in a standardised way — i.e., the phenomenology of ghostly episodes — is now possible with the Survey of Strange Events . However, accounting for Gestalt influences and related variables might not be so simple or straightforward. This aspect of environmental psychology appears 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p80.27
accounting for Gestalt influences and related variables might not be so simple or straightforward. This aspect of environmental psychology appears to be in its infancy despite advancing measurements and methods. To promote new and more stringent research efforts, Table 2 lists possible approaches to gauge the six Gestalt influences discussed here. Some of these originate from published studies, whereas other suggestions come from the present authors. These proposals are not exhaustive but are offered as initial steps in methodologies for researchers to apply, experiment, refine, or even replace as needed. We acknowledge that some of these measurement approaches are not ideal, 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p80.45
to apply, experiment, refine, or even replace as needed. We acknowledge that some of these measurement approaches are not ideal, as they arguably create inherent expectancy or suggestion effects of their own. It might therefore take considerable time and effort to develop practical, reliable, and valid sets of procedures. However, we argue strongly that proper operationalisations and measurements are critical to successful model building and theory formation in this domain Discussion There is ample rationale for expecting certain ambient variables or characteristics of built environments to elicit or mediate anomalous experiences, and notably those often associated with “haunted houses.” Indeed, it 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p80.64
characteristics of built environments to elicit or mediate anomalous experiences, and notably those often associated with “haunted houses.” Indeed, it seems well established that extraordinary experiences — more mystical than paranormal — can be triggered by architectural features Such extraordinary architectural experiences (EAEs) are formally defined as “an encounter with a building or place that fundamentally alters one’s normal state of being. By ‘fundamental alteration’ it is meant a powerful and lasting shift in one’s physical, perceptual, emotional, intellectual, and/or spiritual appreciation of architecture. In contrast, an ordinary experience of architecture, however interesting or engaging, does not cause a significant impact 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p80.82
appreciation of architecture. In contrast, an ordinary experience of architecture, however interesting or engaging, does not cause a significant impact in one’s life” . Illustratively, people report “being one with the world/place” during EAEs, a shift in consciousness that Bermudez believes architecture can influence. For example, in a pilot study using fMRI studies to gauge the frames of mind that different types of buildings may bring about, structures such as temples, retreats, and churches induced markedly contemplative states (with decreased anxiety) when compared to ordinary buildings schools, offices, and houses) . Could allegedly haunted locations cause people to react in a 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p83.01
when compared to ordinary buildings schools, offices, and houses) . Could allegedly haunted locations cause people to react in a manner similar to places that elicit EAEs? It seems possible given that EAEs “occur suddenly, involve important timespace perceptual anomalies, collapse boundaries separating self and other, [and] are extraordinarily vivid” . Furthermore, across thousands of reports, EAEs typically involve strong bodily reactions (goosebumps, weeping, trembling, chills), and a sense of uncontrollability — as do many haunts. In fact, some authors propose that such a mixed bodily state of joy and disturbance produces a sense of “enchantment,” which might explain the appeal 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p83.18
that such a mixed bodily state of joy and disturbance produces a sense of “enchantment,” which might explain the appeal of sacred spaces and ghostly experiences The question of how particular built environments and the elements in them trigger fervent emotions or cognitions echoes the concepts of “affordances” and the interrelationship of feelings and “atmosphere.” It might turn out that settings with pronounced physical factors or Gestalt influences can induce anomalous experiences or EAEs in almost anyone with healthy physiological and psychological functioning. Put another way, an “encounter prone” psychometric profile is perhaps not prerequisite in these instances . Thus, the 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p83.35
psychological functioning. Put another way, an “encounter prone” psychometric profile is perhaps not prerequisite in these instances . Thus, the investigation of discrete environmental factors that can serve as conscious or unconscious prompts for perception may only advance knowledge in this domain to a limited degree. The assumption that haunted houses and ghostly episodes are an interactionist phenomenon (or involve “enactive” processes, cf. Jelic´ et al., 2016, Figures 1 necessitates new research designs that test hypotheses grounded in person environment bidirectional interactions. The current neuroscientific understanding of the psychology of architecture can be summarised this way: “People live in bodies, bodies 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p83.53
interactions. The current neuroscientific understanding of the psychology of architecture can be summarised this way: “People live in bodies, bodies live in spaces…. and brains work in certain ways….Not just conscious thoughts but nonconscious impressions, feedback from our senses, physical movement, and even split second mental simulations of that movement shape how we respond to a place” . The feelings engendered by certain places — and the reasons for those feelings — is an increasingly popular research question. Mainstream researchers in evolutionary and environmental psychology might therefore better leverage the unique benefits that fieldwork studies of “haunted houses” can provide. In 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p83.7
evolutionary and environmental psychology might therefore better leverage the unique benefits that fieldwork studies of “haunted houses” can provide. In this way, hypotheses can be explored and tested in real time and within naturalistic settings. The rubric of ghosts and haunts naturally attracts the general public , which can subsequently encourage large and diverse research samples . We suspect that Gestalt influences are unlikely to be easily or precisely quantified at this stage, so they present a creative methodological challenge for researchers. For example, Affordance presumably interacts with Atmosphere and Ambiguity. A Ouija board that is present in a room, will 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p83.88
researchers. For example, Affordance presumably interacts with Atmosphere and Ambiguity. A Ouija board that is present in a room, will increase affordance while also contributing to the atmosphere of the location and, dependent on the cultural beliefs of the participant, may induce ambiguity, excitement, and/or fear. If such influences are truly “Gestalt” in their nature, simply documenting the individual elements within a built environment will not capture their effect. This calls to mind the arguments Durkheim made regarding the influence of society and culture upon the individuals who are part of society while being disproportionally influenced by it. Applied to haunted, 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p84.09
society and culture upon the individuals who are part of society while being disproportionally influenced by it. Applied to haunted, sacred, or enchanted spaces, researchers might also find value in lessons drawn from the fields of marketing and political science — whereby environment, detail, and background are expertly manipulated to foster specific perceptions and beliefs about people or products. Media manipulation, in this sense, might provide investigators with clues toward defining and understanding the interactions between or among Gestalt influences. More broadly speaking, we give the last word to the late Michael A. Persinger, a prolific neuroscientist and researcher of “sensed 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p84.38
broadly speaking, we give the last word to the late Michael A. Persinger, a prolific neuroscientist and researcher of “sensed presences” and related haunt type experiences. He noted that, while a central architectural principle is that form follows function, “it is as imperative to state…that function follows emotion” Consequently, evolutionary and environmental perspectives should be consistently and vigorously leveraged in future work to help reveal the strength and scope of the “physicalpsychological” interactions that might be haunting our houses and creating environments that some people experience as enchanted or sacred spaces. 	GESTALT INFLUENCES OF HAUNTED HOUSES:  p84.67
conducted two preliminary studies to test the hypothesis that ‘haunted, sacred, or enchanted’ spaces are characterized by certain environmental Gestalt variables that define their space syntax or architectural phenomenology and thus help to consciously or non consciously shape people’s associated impressions or perceptions. Study 1 involved the development of a pilot Visitor Experience Questionnaire to quantify Gestalt effects. Factor analysis revealed a four factor solution defined by a setting’s capacity for Affordance, Ambiguity, Presence, and Sentimentality. Study 2 used this new tool with three participants exhibiting disparate encounter proneness, who 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p64
for Affordance, Ambiguity, Presence, and Sentimentality. Study 2 used this new tool with three participants exhibiting disparate encounter proneness, who participated in an immersive experience at a ‘haunted’ historic house museum. The experimentally blinded participants spent 10 minutes alone in nine different rooms and then completed the VEQ and the Survey of Strange Events (SSE) measure of subjective and objective ghostly anomalies. Results showed that the participants’ anomalous experiences had good levels of congruency across their contents and locations of occurrence. Further, Gestalt ratings significantly correlated with both the participants’ SSE reporting patterns and independent ‘hauntedness’ ratings of the test rooms 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p64.23
Further, Gestalt ratings significantly correlated with both the participants’ SSE reporting patterns and independent ‘hauntedness’ ratings of the test rooms based on prior witness accounts. These findings support the idea that altered anomalous experiences in enchanted (i.e., sacred or haunted) spaces represent an interactionist phenomenon that is partly mediated or moderated by principles of environmental psychology. The uncanny arises out of the supposedly and necessarily empty character of the supernatural as a category; it is not so much that the uncanny fills this category (with ghosts, revenants etc.) – though it may do this readily enough – as that it 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p64.49
uncanny fills this category (with ghosts, revenants etc.) – though it may do this readily enough – as that it suggests a fundamental indecision, an obscurity or uncertainty, at the heart of our ontology, our sense of time, place, and history, both personal and cultural. Introduction Uncanny geographies is our adopted moniker for localized areas and settings associated with high strangeness, or what social scientists sometimes refer to as ‘sacred, haunted, or enchanted spaces’ that often fuel exceptional human experiences . Marinelli and Ricatti arguably introduced the term in their discussion of “emotional geographies of the uncanny” , which referenced emotional 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p64.74
Marinelli and Ricatti arguably introduced the term in their discussion of “emotional geographies of the uncanny” , which referenced emotional spaces where the inhabitants’ perceptions, memories, narratives, and identities had both familiar and unfamiliar elements. Other authors have since knowingly or unwittingly used variations of the phrase, including “uncanny landscapes” , “the urban uncanny” , “domestic uncanny” , “uncanny modernity” , “the uncanny place” , “phenomenology of the uncanny” , “uncanny atmospheres” , and “monumental space and the uncanny” . These latter descriptions have been applied primarily to studies of empathetic place attachment, identity, or embodiment. Such work, by virtue of 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p65
latter descriptions have been applied primarily to studies of empathetic place attachment, identity, or embodiment. Such work, by virtue of its theoretical and conceptual focus, often resists quantification. Our approach, in contrast, focuses on the attributes of settings that can alter consciousness in marked ways. Thus, understanding uncanny geographies can inform dominant concepts in environmental psychology, such as situationalenchantment, numinism, wayfinding, spontaneous fantasies, sense of place, and neuroarchitecture 2022; Franchetto, 2020; Franz, 2021; Goldhagen, 2017; Holloway, 2010; Houran, 2022; Lidov, 2006; Lovell & Griffin, 2022; Lovell & Thurgill, 2021; Mazloomi et al., 2014; Peng et al., 2020; Petersen, 2017; Skandali 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p65.23
2006; Lovell & Griffin, 2022; Lovell & Thurgill, 2021; Mazloomi et al., 2014; Peng et al., 2020; Petersen, 2017; Skandali & Blundell, 2021; van Elk Prime illustrations of the above issues include ‘haunted houses or hauntings,’ which are popular cultural constructions inherently linked to paranormal tourism and heritage psychology To clarify, these reported occurrences involve locations where people report clusters of unusual psychological or subjective experiences emotional manifestations) and physical or objective events object movements, malfunctioning electrical or mechanical equipment, and inexplicable percussive sounds like raps or knocks) (for a review, see Houran It is also important to understand that the 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p65.45
inexplicable percussive sounds like raps or knocks) (for a review, see Houran It is also important to understand that the S/O anomalies characterizing haunt episodes and poltergeist like outbreaks collectively form a probabilistic and unidimensional hierarchy . In other words, percipients typically report a predictable sequence or stacking of different ghostly ‘signs or symptoms.’ This observation suggests the existence of a core ‘encounter’ phenomenon that manifests to particular people under certain conditions and thus can be modelled as a biomedical syndrome However, recent reviews reveal that both parapsychologists and mainstream researchers have rarely applied principles of environmental psychology to fieldwork studies 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p65.68
However, recent reviews reveal that both parapsychologists and mainstream researchers have rarely applied principles of environmental psychology to fieldwork studies of uncanny geographies, and notably settings that are presumably haunted or otherwise sacred. This is unfortunate, as studies increasingly suggest that ghostly episodes are an interactionist phenomenon , involving the “right people in the right settings” . Speaking to this idea, research consistently indicates that anomalous experiences in hauntrelated contexts correlate with thin mental boundary functioning Kumar et al., 2002; Houran, Wiseman et al., 2002; Laythe et al., 2018; Ventola i.e., the concept of heightened sensitivities to internal and external 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p65.91
Houran, Wiseman et al., 2002; Laythe et al., 2018; Ventola i.e., the concept of heightened sensitivities to internal and external stimuli These findings likewise agree with Jelic et al.’s systems theory (or bidirectional person–environment processes) approach to understanding people’s experiences of natural and built environments. Much literature indeed suggests that at least six Gestalt variables help to shape people’s perceptions of settings or spaces , namely: (a) Affordance (“a possibility for action” provided by the environment or the degree of interaction between the surrounding space and the visitor), (b) Ambiguity– Threat Processes (a “risk assessment” in terms of a visitor’s feelings 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p66.13
between the surrounding space and the visitor), (b) Ambiguity– Threat Processes (a “risk assessment” in terms of a visitor’s feelings of comfort or discomfort within the surrounding space), (c) Atmosphere (the overall “tone and impact” of the surrounding space to the visitor), (d) Immersion–Presence (the extent to which the visitor feels physically present within—and totally focused on— the surrounding space), (e) Legibility (the ease with which the surrounding space can be recognized, organized into a pattern, and then recalled— specifically related to clear/unobstructed views and protective places to hide), and (f) Memory Associations (surrounding space contains colours, symbols, textures, objects, sounds, 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p66.34
to clear/unobstructed views and protective places to hide), and (f) Memory Associations (surrounding space contains colours, symbols, textures, objects, sounds, odours, or a sense of ‘time’ with personal meaning to the visitor). Hence, this study might be the first comparative analysis of Gestalt effects on visitors’ perceptions in a reputedly haunted house. We found only a few instruments in the literature pertinent to embodied cognition or sense of place, i.e., the perception, bonding, or attachment that a person has towards a specific environment (for a review and discussion of frameworks and tools, see Boley et al., 2021; Raymond et al., 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p66.55
a specific environment (for a review and discussion of frameworks and tools, see Boley et al., 2021; Raymond et al., 2010; Shamai Moreover, Grassini and Laumann’s systematic review identified several questionnaires that purportedly gauge an individual’s degree of mindfulness within simulated environments, with Witmer and Singer’s Presence Questionnaire being the most prevalent. Other approaches address psychological connection to ‘nature’ or comprise coding systems for people’s perceptions of important features that characterize personal living spaces , sacred architecture , memorable tourism experiences , biophilic design or the flow patterns of feng shui Moreover, some inventories specifically focus on transformational ideations or perceptions 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p66.75
, biophilic design or the flow patterns of feng shui Moreover, some inventories specifically focus on transformational ideations or perceptions that consistently manifest to visitors within certain natural or built environments. These include the state of ‘enchantment’ and the experience of ‘frisson,’ i.e., transcendent psychophysiological moments when listening to music Beyond that, there is growing research on Hillier and Hanson’s larger concept of ‘space syntax’. This theory originated to present a reliable method to evaluate the syntactic properties of different spatial configurations of largescale environments and understand how these can impact a range of human behaviours. These aspects include (a) 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p66.96
spatial configurations of largescale environments and understand how these can impact a range of human behaviours. These aspects include (a) integration, or how easy it is to reach a certain street segment from any part of the city; (b) connectivity, or the number of intersections a street segment has; and (c) intelligibility, or the legibility of a neighborhood or a city. These three measures—tangential to the six Gestalt variables noted earlier—have been widely used to objectively model groupor societal level behaviours within cross cultural contexts Safari, 2020; Lee & Seo, 2013; Long et al., 2007; Summers & Johnson, 2017; Of course, 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p67.16
within cross cultural contexts Safari, 2020; Lee & Seo, 2013; Long et al., 2007; Summers & Johnson, 2017; Of course, the psychological mood or character of spaces has also been studied and discussed within contexts oriented more to interpersonal intimacy comfort, and leisure (see, e.g., Appleton, 1975; Eliovson, The lack of suitable measurement approaches for our purposes required the creation of a brief measure of Gestalt variables that could be administered easily in fieldwork studies of person level perceptions of natural and built environments. Drawing on the initial ideas and recommendations from Jawer et al.’s scoping review, we drafted, discussed, and 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p67.36
and built environments. Drawing on the initial ideas and recommendations from Jawer et al.’s scoping review, we drafted, discussed, and finalized three items for each of the six Gestalt variables mentioned in the introduction, i.e., Affordance, Ambiguity and Threat Processes, Atmosphere, Immersion and Presence, Legibility, and Memory and Associations. This set of 18 items was worded as statements to be rated on four point Likert scales anchored by Strongly Disagree and Strongly Agree . Total raw scores thus range from 18 to 72, with higher scores indicating increased perception of the respective environmental influences. We also included a global rating 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p67.56
18 to 72, with higher scores indicating increased perception of the respective environmental influences. We also included a global rating of a visitor’s experience (i.e., Overall Vibe)—“Your first impression of this surrounding space/area/room:” Very Good Vibes , Good Vibes , No Vibes , Bad Vibes , or Very Bad Vibes . Appendix B gives the full questionnaire, for which we conducted an initial psychometric analysis, as detailed below. Method Participants Pilot data derived was from a convenience sample of 40 respondents (age recruited from the general population via social media advertisements. The original sample consisted of 96 individuals who registered for 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p67.76
(age recruited from the general population via social media advertisements. The original sample consisted of 96 individuals who registered for a larger research project that explored putative psi functioning at a reputedly haunted house, but, unfortunately, we experienced a high attrition rate for unknown reasons. For instance, volunteers might have decided against participating either because the sessions ran on a weekend, or the test site was located in a distant, rural area. Others perhaps reconsidered participating due to their fear of the paranormal . Larger sample sizes are obviously preferable for psychometric studies of pilot measures, but some authors have argued 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p67.96
the paranormal . Larger sample sizes are obviously preferable for psychometric studies of pilot measures, but some authors have argued that n values as low as 30 are acceptable for computing Cronbach alpha coefficients for internal reliability or conducting Rasch analyses to explore the scaling properties of questionnaire items . Measures In addition to basic demographic questions and the VEQ measure, we administered the 17 item (‘true/false’) Revised Transliminality Scale Transliminality denotes a “hypersensitivity to psychological material originating in (a) the unconscious, and/or (b) the external environment” This perceptual–personality variable thus parallels both Hartmann’s mental boundary construct and the concept 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p68.17
the unconscious, and/or (b) the external environment” This perceptual–personality variable thus parallels both Hartmann’s mental boundary construct and the concept of sensory processing sensitivity . The Rasch reliability of the instrument is 0.82, and RTS scores consistently predict different syncretic cognitions, somatization and hypochondriacal tendencies, and lower psychophysiological thresholds (for overviews, see Evans et al., 2019; Houran Thus, we expected that Transliminality would correlate positively with people’s sensitivity to the Gestalt variables in their immediate space. Procedure The respondents visited a three level historic house museum known as ‘The Whispers Estate’.1 This privately owned, Victorian era residence (non occupied) is a 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p68.39
three level historic house museum known as ‘The Whispers Estate’.1 This privately owned, Victorian era residence (non occupied) is a popular tourism site due to its folklore and enduring reputation for being haunted . The earliest discovered records indicate that the house was built in 1894, and its current external condition could be described as ‘poor’ and its internal condition as ‘fair.’ We rented the site for both Studies 1 and 2, so that the procedures described in this report were closed to the public and conducted under more highly controlled conditions. Our pilot sample (segmented into smaller groups of about 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p68.61
closed to the public and conducted under more highly controlled conditions. Our pilot sample (segmented into smaller groups of about eight people) was asked to spend approximately 10 minutes in the dining room of the house collectively and then complete a paper and pencil version of the VEQ, along with (a) basic demographic variables, and (b) several rating scales used in previous research protocols to gauge participants’ Prior Exposure [“Have you heard programs, or websites), where in the Whispers Estate people have reported unusual experiences?”: Definitely Yes, Probably Yes, Uncertain, Probably No, Definitely No) and Present Expectation (“Do you expect 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p68.83
people have reported unusual experiences?”: Definitely Yes, Probably Yes, Uncertain, Probably No, Definitely No) and Present Expectation (“Do you expect to have any unusual experiences in The Whispers today?”: Definitely Yes, Probably Yes, Uncertain, Probably No, Definitely No)]. This was the only task in which the group rated Gestalt variables in the immediate environment. Further, there are several reasons why we used this particular room for the VEQ pilot testing: (a) the area was a logical and convenient meeting place for the respondents who later participated in a different set of unrelated research procedures elsewhere in the house, (b) the setting 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p69.07
the respondents who later participated in a different set of unrelated research procedures elsewhere in the house, (b) the setting was a large enough space for the groups to stand comfortably and experience the setting, and (c) it was a ‘control’ area that had almost no prior reports of anomalous phenomena. Thus, this group of respondents merely provided pilot data for us to examine the psychometric properties of the VEQ tool, which later featured in the immersive exercise in Study 2 using an independent group of participants. Results Readability Table 1 gives the readability statistics for the VEQ as calculated using 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p69.4
using an independent group of participants. Results Readability Table 1 gives the readability statistics for the VEQ as calculated using the Readability Analyzer.2 The results indicate that the pilot measure reflects a 7th of reading comprehension. Factor structure The Cronbach alpha for the VEQ was 0.73, which meets Kline’s threshold for satisfactory reliability. Yet these six Gestalt variables might not be unidimensional. Here we conducted an exploratory maximum likelihood factor analysis on the 18 variables, followed by Varimax rotation using the scikit learn software . Missing values were replaced with the mean value of the variable. Table 2 shows our 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p69.72
the scikit learn software . Missing values were replaced with the mean value of the variable. Table 2 shows our preferred solution, with the first three factors explaining 27%, 13%, and 12% of the total variance, respectively. All loadings are low but they form a highly consistent pattern as is indicated by the bolded entries. The first factor (interpreted as Presence) combines the six Atmosphere and Immersion items, as their loadings on this factor consistently exceed those on all other factors. Similarly, the third factor captures all three Memory Association items and so is construed as Sentimentality. Not surprisingly, the six 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p70.02
Similarly, the third factor captures all three Memory Association items and so is construed as Sentimentality. Not surprisingly, the six Ambiguity and Legibility items have opposite loadings on Factor 2, which likely reflects that increases in Legibility inherently involve lower Ambiguity, although not necessarily vice versa. Higher scores on this factor therefore denote greater overall Ambiguity. Interestingly, the three Affordance variables did not load on a common factor; in fact, they did not load appreciably on any of the factors. This is not because factor extraction was terminated prematurely, as Table 4 also shows a fourth factor that explained 6% 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p70.2
This is not because factor extraction was terminated prematurely, as Table 4 also shows a fourth factor that explained 6% of the variance but lacked a clearly interpretable pattern. As a result, we pragmatically treat the three Affordance items as a pseudo or putative factor throughout this report. Reliability and scaling properties Using the factor structure described above, the four factors were Rasch scaled using the rating scale model with four ordinal categories 0, 1, 2, and 3. The right portion of Table 2 indicates that the items showed acceptable fit, as only one of the item’s Outfit statistics exceeded 1.4 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p70.37
of Table 2 indicates that the items showed acceptable fit, as only one of the item’s Outfit statistics exceeded 1.4 —i.e., Item 6 of the Presence factor had an Outfit of 1.60, which significantly exceeds 1 . However, as shown in Figure 1, together the six items acceptably reproduce the relation between respondents’ ratings (y axis) and their estimated trait levels (x axis). Specifically, as indicated by the surrounding 95% confidence interval, only one marginal excursion outside the 95% confidence interval can be observed near the highest trait levels . Table 3 shows the standard Pearson correlations between the four Gestalt 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p70.54
can be observed near the highest trait levels . Table 3 shows the standard Pearson correlations between the four Gestalt factors (above the diagonal), as well as their reliabilities (on the diagonal, bolded), and their attenuation corrected correlations (below the diagonal). It can be seen that of the four sub factors Affordance is by far the least reliable , which is not surprising given the factor analysis results. Also, this factor correlates lowest with all other factors when computing the standard Pearson correlation shown above the diagonal. However, when correcting for attenuation, the highest (absolute) attenuationcorrected correlation occurs between Sentimentality 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p70.72
standard Pearson correlation shown above the diagonal. However, when correcting for attenuation, the highest (absolute) attenuationcorrected correlation occurs between Sentimentality and Affordance (below the diagonal). Yet this coefficient is not sufficiently high to blur the distinction between Affordance and Forgetting and associations). These findings argue for adding Affordance items in order to increase the reliability of this ostensible factor and thus obtain a clearer pattern of results. Construct validity Two Spearman rank order correlations were used to assess validity. First, the total VEQ scores were significantly associated with how the experients perceived the Overall Vibe of the area or room. Second, 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p70.89
total VEQ scores were significantly associated with how the experients perceived the Overall Vibe of the area or room. Second, the total VEQ scores and RTS (Transliminality) scores showed a moderately strong relationship . In other words, the perception of environmental Gestalt variables was associated with the respondents’ sensitivity levels to both internal and external based stimuli. Table 4 breaks down this result by examining the associations between Transliminality, Overall Vibe, and the four factor solution for Gestalt variables. Moreover, the total VEQ scores also correlated with participants’ Prior Knowledge and Present Expectation concerning The Whispers Estate. This provides additional evidence 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p72.42
total VEQ scores also correlated with participants’ Prior Knowledge and Present Expectation concerning The Whispers Estate. This provides additional evidence for expectancy state effects with Gestalt variables. An illustrative practical application The respondents reported no difficulties with understanding or using the VEQ items to rate the attributes or mood of the dining room in The Whispers. We expect, therefore, that our tool can be administered equally well via hard copy or digital versions. Table 5 shows the averaged environmental Gestalt ratings, and it can be seen that the respondents perceived the room as generally higher in Affordance but relatively lower 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p73.2
ratings, and it can be seen that the respondents perceived the room as generally higher in Affordance but relatively lower in Ambiguity, Presence, and Sentimentality. This Gestalt profile corresponded to a mean Overall Vibe rating of 3.59 , indicating that the space elicited ‘neutral to slightly good vibes’ for the respondents. This result is consistent with the room’s reputation as a ‘paranormally quiet’ area, as well as research documenting more positive feelings toward communal eating activities and the opinions of interior designers who characterize ‘dining rooms’ as particularly welcoming and versatile spaces for social bonding . Conclusions Factor analysis and Rasch 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p73.6
designers who characterize ‘dining rooms’ as particularly welcoming and versatile spaces for social bonding . Conclusions Factor analysis and Rasch scaling of our pilot data generally support the construct validity of the VEQ, although its readability and reliability are not yet optimized. We therefore have limited confidence in using the tool to explore Gestalt effects in field settings. Preliminary data collection and analysis can nonetheless serve as valuable exploratory research to generate new hypotheses for future studies. Assuming it performs adequately well in quantifying visitors’ experiences and impressions across distinctly different areas and spaces, we argue there would be justification to 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p74
well in quantifying visitors’ experiences and impressions across distinctly different areas and spaces, we argue there would be justification to invest the time and effort in developing an extended and robust Rasch scaled version of the tool to gain interval level and unbiased measurements based on larger samples (for a discussion, see As such, Study 2 primarily intended to establish a proof ofconcept for measuring visitors’ holistic impressions and experiences of natural or built environments. However, Study 2 uses just three participants, and it is possible therefore to report all observed data verbatim and without the need for simplification or 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p74.2
three participants, and it is possible therefore to report all observed data verbatim and without the need for simplification or elaboration, as would be imposed by either technique. Thus, the results of Study 2 are simply presented ‘as is’ based on raw summed scores using the four factor solution for the VEQ (note that Appendix A also gives the summed scores for the original six factor solution). Study 2: Exploratory field study of Gestalt variables Research suggests that ‘ghost narratives’—as personal beliefs, shared stories, or putative experiences—can be powerfully memetic and immersive experiences due in part to their inherent Versatility, Adaptability, 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p74.39
beliefs, shared stories, or putative experiences—can be powerfully memetic and immersive experiences due in part to their inherent Versatility, Adaptability, Participatory Nature, Universality, and Scalability It also helps when such narratives are rooted in a historical foundation that reinforces a sense of authenticity or salience Particularly, Franz described the idea of “haunted intimacy, where ghosts exert a personal and relational presence to the material world; hauntings invite the living into an affective and sympathetic relationship to the space and the past” . Previous studies have therefore used reportedly haunted environments to study the psychology of expectancy effects and immersive experiences 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p74.58
past” . Previous studies have therefore used reportedly haunted environments to study the psychology of expectancy effects and immersive experiences in externally valid contexts Escolà Gascón & Houran, 2021; French et al., 2009; Houran, Lange et al., 2022; Langston & Hubbard, 2019; Pharino et al., 2018; Tashjian et al., 2022; Wiseman Note that an ‘immersive experience’ is customarily defined as an illusory environment that completely surrounds you such that you feel that you are inside it and part of it . The term originated with technology environments designed to command the senses such as virtual, augmented, or mixed realities. But paranormal 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p74.77
The term originated with technology environments designed to command the senses such as virtual, augmented, or mixed realities. But paranormal related activities and experiences help to redefine ‘immersive’ in terms of psychological absorption, or the “disposition for having episodes of ‘total’ attention that fully engage one’s representational (i.e., perceptual, enactive, imaginative, and ideational) resources” Simply put, this entails the cognitive capacity for involvement in sensory and imaginative experiences in ways that alter a person’s perception, memory, and mood, with important behavioural and biological consequences. This view dovetails nicely with Moeran’s distinction in ethnography between a ‘participant observer’ and ‘observant participant.’ The 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p74.96
and biological consequences. This view dovetails nicely with Moeran’s distinction in ethnography between a ‘participant observer’ and ‘observant participant.’ The former method of information gathering presents more opportunities for mobile positioning, outward gazing, and inscription, whereas the latter approach allows more opportunities for fixed positioning, inward gazing, and incarnation . Similarly, rather than just partake in a techno generated illusion, paranormal enthusiasts invest time and resources in the hope of personally experiencing something visceral and enthralling in real life. Such individuals often become ‘betwixt and between’ reality and fantasy, by encountering events or having experiences that directly challenge or expand 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p75.17
individuals often become ‘betwixt and between’ reality and fantasy, by encountering events or having experiences that directly challenge or expand their understanding of reality and their place in it This state of situational enchantment is fascinating in itself, and bridges parapsychology with the humanistic and transpersonal psychologies . Accordingly, we conducted a field study to test whether participants with different perceptual–personality profiles would report altered anomalous experiences during a prolonged and immersive ‘haunted house’ experience , and whether such perceptions would be congruent in content and location across the participants , as well as correlate to the type or intensity of 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p75.38
be congruent in content and location across the participants , as well as correlate to the type or intensity of Gestalt variables in the local environment . Method Participants We pre screened our network of professional contacts for three individuals with different perceptual–personality profiles, relatively easy access to the field study location, presumed fear control due to prior experience with fieldwork settings, and the mindset to take this exercise seriously. This approach allowed us to isolate one person to each level of the test site during every phase of the proceedings. Participation was entirely voluntary and could be stopped at any 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p75.59
of the test site during every phase of the proceedings. Participation was entirely voluntary and could be stopped at any time. Our participant selection process was more pragmatic than structured. That is, we simply asked our contacts how many prior haunt type experiences they have had. This metric was subsequently used to estimate their respective trait levels of Transliminality and Paranormal Belief, which then allowed us to quickly identify the most suitable candidates for our purposes. In particular more haunt experiences implies higher Transliminality and Paranormal Belief, whereas fewer haunt experiences suggests lower Transliminality and Paranormal Belief . This selection 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p75.8
experiences implies higher Transliminality and Paranormal Belief, whereas fewer haunt experiences suggests lower Transliminality and Paranormal Belief . This selection approach worked well, as can be seen in Table 6. Our volunteers had different combinations of age and gender, and, most importantly, varying questionnaire levels of Transliminality and Paranormal Belief Philosophy and Traditional Paranormal Beliefs). These three participants thus represent a spectrum of encounter proneness, as corroborated by their scores on the Survey of Strange Events details) pertaining to their lifetime inventory of (entity) encounter experiences prior to this study. Specifically, Visitor C was ‘strongly encounter prone’ above average Transliminality/above average 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p76.01
inventory of (entity) encounter experiences prior to this study. Specifically, Visitor C was ‘strongly encounter prone’ above average Transliminality/above average Paranormal Beliefs), Visitor A was ‘moderately encounter prone’ (average Transliminality/above average Paranormal Beliefs), and Visitor B was ‘weakly encounter prone’ (below average Transliminality/below average Paranormal Beliefs). Measures As in Study 1, the participants completed the RTS prior to their on site visit. We also administered Lange, Irwin and Houran’s Rasch version of Tobacyk’s Revised Paranormal Belief Scale (RPBS). The original 26 item, Likert based form (seven response categories anchored by “strongly disagree to strongly agree”) has an artificial structure of seven 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p76.44
item, Likert based form (seven response categories anchored by “strongly disagree to strongly agree”) has an artificial structure of seven factors due to differential item functioning, i.e., sex and age response biases. Correcting for these measurement problems with a ‘top down purification’ procedure using Modern Test Theory, Lange, Irwin et al. showed that the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale comprises only two, moderately correlated belief subscales that ostensibly reflect different issues of control. Specifically, New Age Philosophy (NAP) seems related to a greater sense of control over interpersonal and external events (e.g., “Some individuals are able to levitate (lift) objects through 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p76.87
a greater sense of control over interpersonal and external events (e.g., “Some individuals are able to levitate (lift) objects through mental forces”), whereas Traditional Paranormal Beliefs (TPB) (5 items, seem more culturally transmitted and beneficial in maintaining social control via a belief in magic, determinism, and a mechanistic view of the world possible to cast spells on persons”). Several studies support the construct validities of these two subscales which both have a mean of 25 . Finally, the visitors completed the VEQ and Survey of Strange Events (SSE) ratings for each of the nine test rooms in the haunted house that 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p77.14
VEQ and Survey of Strange Events (SSE) ratings for each of the nine test rooms in the haunted house that they visited alone, as per the protocol outlined below. The SSE is a 32 item, ‘true/false’ Rasch scaled measure of the overall perceptual intensity (or depth) of a ghostly account or narrative via a checklist of anomalous experiences inherent to these episodes. The SSE’s Rasch item hierarchy specifically represents the probabilistic ordering of S/O events according to their endorsement rates but rescaled into a metric called ‘logits.’ Higher logit values denote higher positions (or greater difficulty) on the Rasch scale . 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p77.35
rescaled into a metric called ‘logits.’ Higher logit values denote higher positions (or greater difficulty) on the Rasch scale . More information about the conceptual background and psychometric development of this instrument is provided by Houran et al. . Rasch scaled scores range from 22.3 to 90.9 (= raw score with a mean of 50, SD = 10, and Rasch reliability = 0.87. Higher scores correspond to a greater number and intensity of anomalies that define a percipient’s experience. Supporting the SSE’s construct and predictive validities, Houran, Lange et al. found that the phenomenology of ‘spontaneous’ accounts (i.e., ostensibly sincere 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p77.56
the SSE’s construct and predictive validities, Houran, Lange et al. found that the phenomenology of ‘spontaneous’ accounts (i.e., ostensibly sincere and unprimed) differed significantly from control narratives from ‘primed conditions, fantasy scenarios, or deliberate fabrication.’ Follow up studies with the SSE further support its value for content analyses of qualitative reports Immersive test environment We again used The Whispers Estate historic house museum to examine the perceptual depth of self reported S/O anomalies relative to the type or intensity of Gestalt effects present within the physical environment. However, unlike the this research neither directly considered nor explored the ontological reality of 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p77.77
effects present within the physical environment. However, unlike the this research neither directly considered nor explored the ontological reality of spiritual or parapsychological phenomena. Table 7 outlines the house’s three levels and corresponding Hauntedness ratings for each of the nine test rooms. We derived these scores from an ‘expert panel’ rating exercise involving the site owner and the second author, both of whom have different facets of knowledge about the site’s folklore, prior witness reports, and results from scientific research at the location. Each panelist independently rated the degree of Hauntedness associated with each test room and experiences with the 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p77.98
at the location. Each panelist independently rated the degree of Hauntedness associated with each test room and experiences with the Whispers, please rate each of the following nine rooms in terms of their relative ‘hauntedness,’ i.e., how often different people or groups report mysterious experiences or events within each area.”). Response categories followed a five point Likert scale: Reports Never Occur , Reports Rarely Occur , Reports Sometimes Occur , Reports Often Occur , and Reports Almost Always Occur . We then averaged the panelist’s raw scores to produce a final set of Hauntedness ratings for the set of test rooms. 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p78.32
then averaged the panelist’s raw scores to produce a final set of Hauntedness ratings for the set of test rooms. Procedure We used only three volunteers for this exercise to ensure they had ample space, quiet, and time at the location for truly immersive experiences. The exercise was also conducted at night to coincide with the quietest period in the surrounding neighborhood. Each volunteer was experimentally blinded to the identity and details of the test site prior to the study. They were given a paper packet on site that contained VEQ and SSE measures to complete for each test room. These 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p78.69
were given a paper packet on site that contained VEQ and SSE measures to complete for each test room. These questionnaires were clearly labelled to ensure accurate data collection and transcription. The group gathered in the dining room of the house where the second author (B.L.) briefly explained the logistics of the sessions to the participants. Specifically, each was asked first to “feel and soak in the mood or vibe of each test room” and then record their impressions using the VEQ. They were next to walk around and explore the room while alone and in any manner that they 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p79.03
the VEQ. They were next to walk around and explore the room while alone and in any manner that they wished, i.e., act as observant participants . The only requirements were that they were neither to touch any of the items in the rooms, nor to make any noises that could contaminate the other visitors’ impressions or perceptions. Next, the participants used the SSE to document any altered–anomalous experiences they had while in the given test room. After these instructions, the participants were randomly assigned to their first test room, to which they were promptly escorted and left alone for 10 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p79.21
participants were randomly assigned to their first test room, to which they were promptly escorted and left alone for 10 minutes as timed using a digital stopwatch. At the end of each session, the first author (J.H.) announced the time and directed participants to their next rooms for another immersive session. The facilitator was likewise experimentally blinded to the specific reports that participants made in the various test rooms. At the end of the full rotation of test rooms, the second author (B.L.) debriefed the participants about the reported history, folklore, and prior witness reports associated with The Whispers Estate. Results 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p79.39
author (B.L.) debriefed the participants about the reported history, folklore, and prior witness reports associated with The Whispers Estate. Results Hypothesis 1: Altered–anomalous experiences will be facilitated by an immersive ‘haunted house’ experience. The results largely confirmed our expectations. Each participant had at least one anomalous experience during the immersive exercise, which agrees with prior studies showing that activities associated with paranormal tourism predictably elicit anomalous experiences But the participants’ different psychological profiles might suggest that Visitor C (highly encounter prone) would show the highest SSE and VEQ scores, followed by Visitor A (modestly encounter prone) and Visitor B (weakly 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p79.58
prone) would show the highest SSE and VEQ scores, followed by Visitor A (modestly encounter prone) and Visitor B (weakly encounter prone). The participants reported a total of 17 S/O events over the span of 90 minutes. The bulk of these were indeed attributable to Visitor C, but, contrary to expectations, Visitor B reported twice as many anomalies as Visitor A . The summed SSE scores (i.e., perceptual intensity of S/O experiences) across the nine test rooms showed a similar pattern: Visitor C = 271.6, Visitor B = 216.7, and Visitor A = 208.7 . These results cannot be explained entirely 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p79.76
Visitor C = 271.6, Visitor B = 216.7, and Visitor A = 208.7 . These results cannot be explained entirely by expectancy or suggestion effects as all the participants responded with “Probably No” to the screening question, “Have you heard websites), where in The Whispers Estate people have reported experiencing unusual phenomena?” Moreover, there was a strong inverse correlation between SSE scores and the index of explicit anticipation, i.e., “Do you expect to experience any unusual phenomena in The Whispers today?” This indicates that the onset and perceptual intensity of S/O anomalies correlated with lower (versus higher) visitor expectations immediately preceding 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p79.94
This indicates that the onset and perceptual intensity of S/O anomalies correlated with lower (versus higher) visitor expectations immediately preceding the immersive exercise. Finally, consistent with the results above, Visitor C had the highest total VEQ scores across all nine test rooms (sum = followed by Visitor B , and Visitor A . Hypothesis 2: Altered–anomalous experiences will be congruent in content and location across the three participants. Table 8 lists the participants’ SSE and VEQ scores (and individual endorsement patterns) across the nine test rooms. The average SSE scores per room indicate that the anomalous experiences reported by the 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p80.13
patterns) across the nine test rooms. The average SSE scores per room indicate that the anomalous experiences reported by the three participants specifically centred on five of the nine test rooms. And, consistent with our hypotheses, the participants’ experiences further clustered in three of these rooms . Plus, despite their different perceptual–personality profiles, the participants had good levels of congruency in their reported S/O experiences. Visitors B and C showed the highest correlation in their SSE reporting patterns, followed by Visitors A and C . This suggests that Visitor C (strongly encounter prone) was sensitive to the same stimuli affecting Visitors 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p80.31
A and C . This suggests that Visitor C (strongly encounter prone) was sensitive to the same stimuli affecting Visitors A and B, both of whom were less encounter prone. However, Visitors A (modestly encounter prone) and B (weakly encounter prone) showed a noticeably negative correlation (r = –0.19, not significant) in their SSE reporting patterns. This implies important differences in their respective levels of vigilance, detection, or aberrant salience. We should note that the Hauntedness ratings of the nine test rooms showed a positive but near zero correlation with the participants’ SSE scores. The same pattern was found for 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p80.5
test rooms showed a positive but near zero correlation with the participants’ SSE scores. The same pattern was found for Hauntedness ratings and the participants’ averaged ratings of the Overall Vibe of each room (r = 0.04, not significant). This indicates that our participants’ anomalous experiences often occurred in rooms that did not correspond to those areas most associated with prior witness reports as per the expert panel. We conclude, therefore, that Gestalt variables might not be the only, or the most important, mediators or moderators of anomalous experiences at The Whispers (or other types of uncanny geographies). In other words, 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p80.69
most important, mediators or moderators of anomalous experiences at The Whispers (or other types of uncanny geographies). In other words, Gestalt variables certainly influenced the perception of S/O anomalies by our participants, but we do not know to what extent environmental effects similarly contributed to prior witness reports in other areas of the house. Hypothesis 3: Altered–anomalous experiences will correlate with the type or intensity of Gestalt variables in the local area or environment. The results generally affirmed our expectations. First, the averaged ratings of relative Hauntedness across the nine test rooms showed a moderately high association with total VEQ scores. 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p80.88
the averaged ratings of relative Hauntedness across the nine test rooms showed a moderately high association with total VEQ scores. Second, we found moderately high associations between the participants’ ratings of Gestalt variables (per total VEQ scores) in the nine test rooms and the participants’ total number and perceptual intensity of the haunt experiences (per SSE scaled scores) in those same rooms . Furthermore, SSE scores showed consistently positive correlations between the individual Gestalt variables, although the effect sizes ranged from weak to moderately strong . The one notable exception to this pattern was Ambiguity, which had a negative association 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p82.09
from weak to moderately strong . The one notable exception to this pattern was Ambiguity, which had a negative association with SSE scores. Curiously, this outcome seemingly argues against McAndrew’s view that haunted houses are perceived as ‘spooky or creepy’ due to their ambiguous and threatening internal layouts. Conclusions Real time data on visitors’ experiences strongly suggest that environmental Gestalt variables are significantly related to the perception of some S/O anomalies at The Whispers Estate. The strongest influences were observed for Presence, Affordance, Sentimentality, and Ambiguity, respectively. We should caution that these trends might not indicate a stable heuristic but instead 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p82.35
Presence, Affordance, Sentimentality, and Ambiguity, respectively. We should caution that these trends might not indicate a stable heuristic but instead reflect situational or site specific nuances. Moreover, the perception of Gestalt effects also correlated with people’s perceptual–personality profiles, and notably a permeable mental boundary structure as measured by transliminality. These findings imply that investigators of putative haunts (and other kinds of uncanny geographies) should augment their current methods with notations about, if not measurements of, Gestalt variables in their (a) documentations of the physical characteristics of haunted places, and (b) content analyses of percipients’ reports. This approach should help to contextualize 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p82.62
of the physical characteristics of haunted places, and (b) content analyses of percipients’ reports. This approach should help to contextualize altered–anomalous experiences within the larger framework of systems theory and environmental psychology. Consequently, we recommend that fieldwork investigators expand their current assortment of methods by using the full 18 item VEQ to collect and share raw data on Gestalt effects until the instrument’s psychometric properties and outputs can be fully optimized. Our rationale is that all data points are important, even though we might not know yet how best to use or interpret them. General discuss ion It might be 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p82.88
even though we might not know yet how best to use or interpret them. General discuss ion It might be presumed that the environmental Gestalt variables considered here are concepts that are too ephemeral or nebulous to comprehensively isolate and research in real world settings. However, our results recommend the VEQ as a promising approach to their operationalization and measurement in controlled studies of sacred, haunted, or enchanted spaces. To be sure, our interactionist view of haunt type experiences is supported by the moderately strong and positive association we found between haunt type experiences and Gestalt variables in an externally valid 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p83.11
by the moderately strong and positive association we found between haunt type experiences and Gestalt variables in an externally valid setting. In other words, the psychological impact of a location’s physical and holistic features has an important relationship with the detection or interpretation of S/O anomalies. There is also evidence that this effect is fuelled predominantly by higher degrees of Affordance, Presence (i.e., immersion + atmosphere), and to some extent the Sentimentality of an experient’s immediate space. Taken all together, these preliminary results lend strong credence to the hypothesis that complex or nuanced factors in environmental psychology and architectural phenomenology influence 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p83.32
preliminary results lend strong credence to the hypothesis that complex or nuanced factors in environmental psychology and architectural phenomenology influence perceptions in ghostly episodes Our study was admittedly exploratory and took several liberties. Future research should, therefore, address several limitations with our approach and findings. First, larger scale studies with diverse populations would improve on the smaller convenience sample used here. We are certainly encouraged by the present findings but still regard them as preliminary. Second, it needs to be determined whether our results extend to other types of altered–anomalous experiences, and particularly (entity) encounter experiences stemming from ritual or 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p83.52
determined whether our results extend to other types of altered–anomalous experiences, and particularly (entity) encounter experiences stemming from ritual or otherwise organized settings Another limitation is that we only tested Gestalt variables relative to ‘built’ structures. Thus, new studies ought to explore replications using ‘outdoor or open air’ uncanny geographies of a natural or man made kind . Moreover, we underscore that our documented effects represent perceptions of Gestalt variables rather than direct measurements of features or attributes of structures and settings. This means that VEQ data provides ‘psychological maps’ of locations rather than ‘physical maps’ . Future research might thus 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p83.72
settings. This means that VEQ data provides ‘psychological maps’ of locations rather than ‘physical maps’ . Future research might thus correlate or validate subjective perceptions against actual environmental or spatial measurements. For instance, physical attributes that contribute to the space syntax of an uncanny setting have been quantified manually and sometimes digitally using tools like the depthmapX v0.5 software developed by University College London that can perform different types of space syntax techniques. There are also more advanced and expensive approaches that involve laser imaging, detection, and ranging (Lidar). Also called 3 D laser scanning, this technique is a special combination 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p83.92
that involve laser imaging, detection, and ranging (Lidar). Also called 3 D laser scanning, this technique is a special combination of 3 D scanning and laser scanning that produces fully rendered digital twins of a given environment . The first author (J.H.) was part of an investigation that used this technology in a fieldwork study that informed the 2010 Nat Geo television documentary American Paranormal: Haunted Prison.3 Lidar mapping helped the team to identify areas susceptible to environmental factors like infrasound effects , which possibly contributed to haunt reports at the famous Eastern State Penitentiary historical site (see Applications like 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p84.13
infrasound effects , which possibly contributed to haunt reports at the famous Eastern State Penitentiary historical site (see Applications like these might assist future research in examining the extent to which Gestalt effects are idiosyncratic to individual experients or can be quantified directly and generalized across people with different perceptual–personality profiles. Our study was further confined to Gestalt effects in lone individuals. The impact of multiple participants on the perception of these environmental variables was therefore not tested. Yet previous studies highlight the importance of social influences on paranormal belief and experience as well as immersive experiences more broadly . Thus, 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p84.33
highlight the importance of social influences on paranormal belief and experience as well as immersive experiences more broadly . Thus, social interaction can affect how people construct and make sense of altered– anomalous events As discussed by Ironside and Wooffitt , the body plays a fundamental role in establishing the uncanny status of events through interaction with space, objects, and other bodies. Specifically, social interaction may impact how Gestalt variables are perceived, understood, and reported relative to S/O events within versus outside of one’s personal space. For instance, we might expect percipients to rate environments as lower in Ambiguity–Threat, Legibility, 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p84.54
versus outside of one’s personal space. For instance, we might expect percipients to rate environments as lower in Ambiguity–Threat, Legibility, or Immersion–Presence when they are accompanied by others. Additionally, testing whether the perception of Gestalt factors and anomalous experience align within local groups of people would give valuable insights into the juxtaposition of social and spatial environments. To be sure, much contemporary scholarship presents the uncanny as profoundly social in nature or as a product of people’s uneasy relationship with social forces like modernity or political violence . Thus, rather than being a mere feature of a particular place, uncanny geographies 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p84.74
forces like modernity or political violence . Thus, rather than being a mere feature of a particular place, uncanny geographies might be a cultural site produced through interactions among people, social forces, and the built and natural landscapes. This approach might further clarify the role of Gestalt variables in the formation of anomalous experiences that involve potential ‘contagion’ effects from interpersonal or environmental cues . We speculate that Gestalt variables work in additive ways to define the space syntax of settings at the person level, and that some environmental configurations are more conducive than others for influencing people’s emotions or perceptions. 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p84.94
at the person level, and that some environmental configurations are more conducive than others for influencing people’s emotions or perceptions. This could happen covertly, as with the idea that sacred architecture involves an “invisible order of things” or overtly, as per Stroik’s architectural principles of sacred spaces. Particularly, Gestalt variables might (a) serve as psychological cues that directly stoke or contextualize anomalous experiences , (b) heighten people’s vigilance and attentional focus to S/O events in their immediate environment , or (c) foster anxiety or ‘dis ease’ reactions in experients which might facilitate anomalous experiences via state transliminality . A combination 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p85.14
(c) foster anxiety or ‘dis ease’ reactions in experients which might facilitate anomalous experiences via state transliminality . A combination of these or other scenarios are also possible. In particular, it seems likely that Gestalt variables reinforce or relate to Browning et al.’s principles of biophilic design or Jones’ phenomenology of sacred architecture comprising the concepts of orientation (i.e., allurement of a space), commemoration or history associated with a space), and ritual context outcome of the theatrical aspects of a space). On this latter point, we might even discover that environmental features specifically link to Kapitány et al.’s functional characteristics of 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p85.33
On this latter point, we might even discover that environmental features specifically link to Kapitány et al.’s functional characteristics of ritual experiences. These competing ideas offer a greenfield for future studies and motivate us to reconsider the term uncanny as something more than a mere adjective without an ideological framework. Prior uses of the term might have served as a ‘boundary object’ as per Star and Griesemer’s conceptual framing. That is, it allowed for scholarly conversations across different academic disciplines or theories, albeit in sometimes diverging ways. Since Sigmund Freud published his classic essay “Das Unheimliche” (or “The Uncanny”) in 1919, 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p85.52
theories, albeit in sometimes diverging ways. Since Sigmund Freud published his classic essay “Das Unheimliche” (or “The Uncanny”) in 1919, the term has certainly permeated social scientific and humanistic research. Scholars have revisited and reimagined the concept in myriad ways and have traced the production of the uncanny in literature , architecture , and technology In contemporary vernacular, ‘uncanny’ has come to mean a sense of disruption or disorientation; to experience the uncanny is to face the strange or unfamiliar (see Freud, 1970, But parallelling McAndrew’s views, Thomas Fuchs offered a more precise definition with a darker tone, i.e., “The 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p85.71
(see Freud, 1970, But parallelling McAndrew’s views, Thomas Fuchs offered a more precise definition with a darker tone, i.e., “The uncanny can be phenomenologically described as an atmosphere of defamiliarization which captures the affected with an overwhelming, centripetal effect. This effect places him or her in existential uncertainty, Bangnis, anxiety and terror precisely through its intangibility and ambiguity” . This description fits aspects of ‘situational enchantment’ (see Drinkwater et al., 2022; Houran, Lange et al., but to us fails as a properly balanced characterization of uncanniness. We prefer to build on Jentsch and Freud’s ideas and propose that uncanny geographies are 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p85.9
properly balanced characterization of uncanniness. We prefer to build on Jentsch and Freud’s ideas and propose that uncanny geographies are better understood as “liminal landscapes,” i.e., settings with qualities that disorient people and thus produce dis ease states, especially for those with looser mental boundaries. . But, contrary to Fuchs , we contend that uncanny geographies can produce distressing or enriching thoughts and feelings. This paper only scratches the surface, so further research is clearly needed to understand how principles in environmental psychology and architectural phenomenology mediate or moderate anomalous–altered experiences. In fact, we expect at this stage that most studies 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p86.11
environmental psychology and architectural phenomenology mediate or moderate anomalous–altered experiences. In fact, we expect at this stage that most studies along these lines will necessarily be exploratory (or hypothesis generating) rather than confirmatory (or hypothesis testing). Speaking more broadly, our preliminary findings also can guide more comprehensive research on environmental Gestalt variables as psychological constructs and their relation to place identity or attachment. We should first verify whether the six presumably distinct variables that help to influence people’s impressions of spaces or settings indeed constitute four factors Ambiguity, Presence, Sentimentality, and Affordance) or involve a different solution. This sort of 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p86.32
spaces or settings indeed constitute four factors Ambiguity, Presence, Sentimentality, and Affordance) or involve a different solution. This sort of initiative could likewise enlighten the ongoing debate about the dimensionality of the ‘sense of place’ concept et al., 2021; Devine Wright, 2011; Hernández et al., 2007; Peng et al., 2020; But, as it stands, our VEQ findings justify a larger scale effort to study the factor structure and psychometric properties of the VEQ (or future modifications) using robust analytics grounded in Modern Test Theory Improved tools and models like these should help to advance our scientific understanding of uncanny geographies and 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p86.54
Modern Test Theory Improved tools and models like these should help to advance our scientific understanding of uncanny geographies and people’s perceptions of other types of settings or spaces. The implications and applications of new findings in this domain can thus act as a bridge between the neighbouring sciences of consciousness studies and environmental psychology. We expect that this juncture is an obvious and open doorway to narrative theory, which would construe experiences of uncanny geographies as subjective and pliable constructions versus objective and fixed representations of physical reality . 	GESTALT VARIABLES UNCANNY GEOGRAPHIES:  p86.76
We review conceptualizations and measurements of base (or core) experiences commonly attributed to haunts and poltergeists (i.e., “ghostly episodes”). Case analyses, surveys, controlled experiments, and field studies have attempted to gauge anomalous experiences in this domain, albeit with methods that do not cumulatively build on earlier research. Although most approaches agree, to an extent, on the base experiences or events that witnesses report, the literature lacks a standard operationalization that can be used to test the factor structure of these occurrences or allow meaningful comparisons of findings across studies. Towards filling this 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p24
used to test the factor structure of these occurrences or allow meaningful comparisons of findings across studies. Towards filling this gap, we identified 28 base experiences that include subjective (or psychological) experiences, more typical of haunts, and objective (or physical) manifestations, more common to poltergeist like disturbances. This qualitatively vetted list is proposed as the foundation for new measurement approaches, research designs, and analytical methods aimed to advance model building and theory formation. Keywords: ghost, haunt, phenomenology, poltergeist, psychometrics “If you can’t measure it, you can’t manage it.” 6 Several early and prominent scientists – including Oliver Lodge, William Crookes, and Frederick 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p24.26
measure it, you can’t manage it.” 6 Several early and prominent scientists – including Oliver Lodge, William Crookes, and Frederick W. H. Myers – were keen to apply pioneering science in the study of spontaneous cases, notably apparitions, haunts, and poltergeist like outbreaks. Their activities with organizations like the Society for Psychical Research (SPR) and the Ghost Club sparked a legacy of instrumentation that today is most closely associated with technical hardware . The literature from this perspective shows that ghostly experiences can involve measured or inferred physical events such as object movements, raps and knocking, electrical disturbances, malfunctioning equipment, and anomalies 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p24.55
can involve measured or inferred physical events such as object movements, raps and knocking, electrical disturbances, malfunctioning equipment, and anomalies of various types of recording media. That said, other important instrumentation seems to garner less widespread attention or appreciation, particularly psychometric tools and test theory . Certainly, parapsychologists have long been interested in advances in questionnaire and survey design, data collection, and analytical techniques. For example, Gurney, Myers, and Podmore conducted a large scale survey of non pathological ‘hallucinations’ – the first of its kind in the mind sciences – that revealed apparitions to be relatively common experiences in the general population. Shortly 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p24.84
its kind in the mind sciences – that revealed apparitions to be relatively common experiences in the general population. Shortly after, Gurney initiated an international replication with the SPR’s classic “Census of Hallucinations” . This was the first truly international project commissioned by the International Congress of Psychology and arguably set the stage for fresh reviews of historic and spontaneous cases dealing with ghosts and kindred phenomena , as well as opinion polls on global and specific paranormal beliefs and experiences in contemporary society . These collective efforts have documented a variety of subjective or psychological experiences inherent to ghostly encounters, such 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p25.09
contemporary society . These collective efforts have documented a variety of subjective or psychological experiences inherent to ghostly encounters, such as visual apparitions, voices or various auditory perceptions, unusual bodily sensations or sudden temperature changes, abrupt emotional disruptions, and sensed presences. Research on ghosts and related phenomena is not sparse , but unfortunately the literature is not always uniform with operationalizations. Ghostly episodes do not seem to be a simple phenomenon but rather a multifaceted mixture of psychological, environmental, and potentially parapsychological factors . Comprehensive and data driven models are lacking arguably due to this complexity as well as, in part, the 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p25.29
factors . Comprehensive and data driven models are lacking arguably due to this complexity as well as, in part, the absence of easily comparable and representative measurements of the fundamental features of these occurrences. We first review various methods used to assess the phenomenology of ghostly episodes and then outline the practical and theoretical merits of a more robust psychometric approach. We are not suggesting that important developments have not been made. In fact, meaningful progress has come from in depth treatments of surveys, historical accounts, and free response data, which go beyond basic content or affective theme analyses . For instance, 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p25.49
of surveys, historical accounts, and free response data, which go beyond basic content or affective theme analyses . For instance, techniques in forensic linguistics purport to appraise the internal veracity of witness accounts , whereas the use of semiotics or the more powerful method of computerized Latent Semantic Analysis have been used as types of “factor analysis of language” to model the semantics and structure of paranormal narratives. Other approaches, such as Interpretive Phenomenological Analysis and Conversation Analysis , take a qualitative, phenomenological approach combining hermeneutics and idiography to understand how percipients construct meaning from their experiences and likewise how experiences affect individuals. 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p25.7
approach combining hermeneutics and idiography to understand how percipients construct meaning from their experiences and likewise how experiences affect individuals. This last approach is particularly relevant given the way that witnesses may “mold” their accounts in the face of skepticism . Previous Approaches to Assessing Ghostly Episodes Psychometric studies in this domain face the immediate challenge that generic claims of “encountering a ghost” can unwittingly entail separate classes of events unfamiliar to laypeople but differentiated by parapsychologists. On one hand, a witness could simply refer to a singular experience of an apparition or other anomaly, while, on the other, accounts could allude 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p25.9
could simply refer to a singular experience of an apparition or other anomaly, while, on the other, accounts could allude to a more complex haunt or poltergeist episode. Such issues of operationalization and the theories that drive nomenclatures are critically important. Some researchers clearly differentiate haunts and poltergeists or suggest they involve a constellation of different phenomena . We argue that a firm distinction between the two episodes is currently problematic. That is, identifiable features of these episodes substantially overlap , and they sometimes seem to occur in tandem within individual cases . In fact, contents underlying both haunt and poltergeist episodes 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p26.14
they sometimes seem to occur in tandem within individual cases . In fact, contents underlying both haunt and poltergeist episodes have been Rasch scaled to form a collective hierarchy or continuum . These patterns suggest that a common underlying phenomenon or set of mechanisms might be operating across both types of episodes, consistent with others’ speculations . For these reasons and the purposes of this paper, we refer to apparitions and corresponding anomalies, haunts and poltergeists collectively as ghostly episodes. Several authors have proposed that these occurrences have a structured or cumulative pattern of events. Sudre noted that ghostly phenomena do not 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p26.43
have proposed that these occurrences have a structured or cumulative pattern of events. Sudre noted that ghostly phenomena do not manifest continuously over the life of the phenomenon. Although they tend to occur in the same area, the displays are episodic. Palmer was perhaps the first to propose the interesting notion that ghostly phenomena might progress systematically over time. Similarly, Nisbet suggested that, like some illnesses, poltergeist like episodes have an “incubation” period before phenomena begin. Experiences may then subsequently build upon themselves like a contagious process. “Contagious” processes in conjunction with ghostly episodes are a well known proposal . According to Playfair 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p26.72
like a contagious process. “Contagious” processes in conjunction with ghostly episodes are a well known proposal . According to Playfair , there are approximately 19 “symptoms” of a poltergeist outbreak, beginning with raps and ending with equipment failure of cameras, tape recorders, and so forth. Individual cases may involve only half a dozen of these symptoms, but Playfair asserted that, “You always get them in the same order. You don’t get puddles of water before stone throwing, you don’t get fires before raps…there is a predictable behavior pattern. They appear to be random to us, but they’re obeying some sort of rules 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p27.01
raps…there is a predictable behavior pattern. They appear to be random to us, but they’re obeying some sort of rules that they understand even if we don’t (pp. 388 This assertion might be overly deterministic, but Houran and Brugger similarly argued that haunts and poltergeists could form a hierarchy and that determining the probability of certain anomalies should provide clues to the nature of these phenomena or provide critical insights into specific cases. This hierarchy might also characterize séance type phenomena. Recent work by Laythe and colleagues , in a post hoc examination of frequency distributions of internal and external perceptions within 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p27.17
work by Laythe and colleagues , in a post hoc examination of frequency distributions of internal and external perceptions within an occult themed séance, found a repeated pattern of sensations and observations that suggested a hierarchy. Indeed, ghostly episodes seem more structured than random. In the first of a series of studies on context effects in spontaneous cases, Lange, Houran, Harte, and Havens analyzed a large set of purportedly sincere ghost narratives published in commercial books. They developed a list of seven distinct types of anomalous experience commonly reported across these accounts, along with brief definitions: 1. Visual: Perception of a form, 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p27.34
distinct types of anomalous experience commonly reported across these accounts, along with brief definitions: 1. Visual: Perception of a form, e.g., a moving shadow, amorphous light, or a defined apparition which is mistaken as a real person. 2. Auditory: Sound phenomena that cannot be accounted for, e.g., footsteps, percipient’s name being called out, or knockings. 3. Olfactory: Anomalous or unaccountable odor, e.g., the smell of flowers or cigars. 4. Tactile: Physical sensations, e.g., cold, heat, or a touch on the shoulder. 5. Sensed Presence: Feeling of being watched or not alone. 6. Object Movement: Subjective certainty that an object either unaccountably disappeared, appeared 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p27.5
Presence: Feeling of being watched or not alone. 6. Object Movement: Subjective certainty that an object either unaccountably disappeared, appeared from seemingly nowhere, physically moved while in sight, or an inferred movement, e.g., losing a personal item, finding an object in your residence which does not belong to you, or a door opening on its own accord. 7. Erratic Functioning of Apparatus: Unaccountable malfunction or irregular operation of mechanical fixtures or electrical equipment, e.g., electrical current surges, telephone rings, light bulb failures, jammed door locks, and film processing difficulties. These types reflect the definition of apparitional experiences provided by Baker , adapted 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p27.67
jammed door locks, and film processing difficulties. These types reflect the definition of apparitional experiences provided by Baker , adapted from Thalbourne’s Glossary: “A sensory experience in which there appears to be present a person or animal (deceased or living) who is in fact out of sensory range of the experient…” . This list was subsequently used to study other types of “entity encounters,” including angelic visitations , deathbed visions , and shamanic trance journeys Consistent with earlier psychological thinking on apparitions Houran’s meta analysis of these studies revealed: (i) a strong congruence between the content of the experiences and the nature 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p27.84
Houran’s meta analysis of these studies revealed: (i) a strong congruence between the content of the experiences and the nature of the contextual variables (i.e., psychological or environmental cues) available to percipients; (ii) that the number of contextual variables was related to percipients’ state of arousal immediately preceding the experience; and (iii) that the number of contextual variables was also associated with the number of perceptual modalities involved in experiences. Harte’s basic replication of Lange et al. amended the above list to include the new category of Emotional Feeling, defined as an “unaccountable onset of emotion (e.g., becoming inexplicably depressed, irritable, or 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p28
include the new category of Emotional Feeling, defined as an “unaccountable onset of emotion (e.g., becoming inexplicably depressed, irritable, or fearful)” . This amended list was later used to code free response narratives of research participants in a field study of Edinburgh’s historic South Bridge Vaults . Other studies have utilized more general measures of anomalous experience. For instance, Lange and Houran studied the role of expectation and suggestion effects in a purported haunt using an experiential questionnaire with 10 subscales related to psychological and physiological perceptions, originally designed for research on mirror gazing and the influence of magnetic fields . A parallel 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p28.16
psychological and physiological perceptions, originally designed for research on mirror gazing and the influence of magnetic fields . A parallel study by French, Hague, Bunton Stasyshyn, and Davis examined the role of expectation suggestion, electromagnetic stimulation, and infrasound for inducing ghostly experiences in a controlled, artificially constructed “haunted chamber (room).” These researchers used a total score from a 20 item, true/false EXIT scale, adapted from a three point Likert version by Granqvist et al. , to measure anomalous experiences (e.g., “felt dizzy or odd, felt a presence, tingling sensations”) associated with the manipulation of environmental variables in the room. Although many of 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p28.32
or odd, felt a presence, tingling sensations”) associated with the manipulation of environmental variables in the room. Although many of their participants reported anomalous sensations of various kinds, the number reported was unrelated to experimental condition but correlated with scores on a controversial measure of signs or symptoms of temporal lobe stimulation or activity in the general population . As a result, French et al. concluded that suggestibility was the most parsimonious explanation for their findings, although there has been criticism of their infrasonic measurement . We should further note that the EXIT scale does not have robust internal consistency, with Cronbach’s 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p28.49
their infrasonic measurement . We should further note that the EXIT scale does not have robust internal consistency, with Cronbach’s alpha coefficients ranging from .68 to .71, so its usefulness for ongoing research is questionable. Taking a different approach, Kumar and Pekala presented an 8 item Poltergeist subscale developed from existing items on their Anomalous Experiences Inventory (AEI), adapted from the Mental Experiences Inventory . This subscale takes a more liberal view of these episodes – one that places ghosts within a wider context of entity encounter narratives and traditions . The items reference the themes of “seeing a ghost, possessed by 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p28.65
wider context of entity encounter narratives and traditions . The items reference the themes of “seeing a ghost, possessed by an outside force, having a scary psychic experience, objects appearing or disappearing, objects floating in the air, communicating with the dead, and seeing fairies or other folklore type entities.” Kumar and Pekala found that scores on this subscale were positively related to a number of hypnosis specific attitudes and behaviors. A related subscale, an index of Encounter Experiences, comprises 11 “true/false” items from the Anomalous Experiences Inventory that encompass an even broader definition of encounter experiences : 1. I am able to communicate 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p28.81
the Anomalous Experiences Inventory that encompass an even broader definition of encounter experiences : 1. I am able to communicate with supernatural forces 2. I have experienced other planes of existence beyond the physical 3. I have had an out of body experience 4. I have tried channeling or have been a medium 5. I have communicated with the dead 6. I have seen a ghost or apparition 7. At times, I have felt possessed by an outside force 8. I can leave my body and return at will 9. I have experienced or met an extraterrestrial 10. I am able to 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p28.97
leave my body and return at will 9. I have experienced or met an extraterrestrial 10. I am able to communicate with the dead 11. I have seen elves, fairies, and other types of little people We know of only a few studies using this index , originally designed for a study on shamanistic phenomena. However, this index consistently correlates with paranormal belief and permeability in mental boundaries, echoing patterns reported by Kumar and Pekala for the Anomalous Experiences Inventory Poltergeist subscale. Note that the Encounter index, like other methods reviewed here, aims to measure the number of different properties or modalities 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p29.38
Note that the Encounter index, like other methods reviewed here, aims to measure the number of different properties or modalities of encounter experience, as opposed to the frequency of each modality. Elements Defining Narratives of Ghostly Episodes This collection was subjected to an iterative process of review, discussion, and agreement among the authors, who sometimes argued for refining or distinguishing among subtleties in anomalies based on the literature, ideology, and personal field research. Lastly, we note that this list includes anomalies that are inferred or documented via recording media, a distinction not consistently made in the literature. We recommend this final collection 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p29.83
are inferred or documented via recording media, a distinction not consistently made in the literature. We recommend this final collection of 28 core experiences as the basis for a standard operationalization in this domain. Table 1: Themes Represented in Narratives of Ghostly Episodes Sample Supporting References * Putative Personal Experiences Non descript anomalous image, like fog, shadow, cloud, or streak of light “Overt” ghost or apparition – a translucent image with human form “Covert” ghost or apparition – anomalous presence that looked like a living person Pleasant odor Unpleasant odor Recognizable sounds, e.g., voices or music Onset of positive emotion Onset of negative 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p32.14
a living person Pleasant odor Unpleasant odor Recognizable sounds, e.g., voices or music Onset of positive emotion Onset of negative emotion Bodily sensations, e.g., dizziness, tingling, electrical shock, or nausea Strange taste in mouth Guided, controlled, or possessed by an outside force Mystical beings, such as angels or demons Folklore type beings, such as elves, fairies, or other types of “little people” Communication with the dead or other outside force Sensed presence or feeling of being watched Déjà vu type thoughts or feelings * Putative Physical Events Area of cold Area of heat Object movements or levitations Electrical or mechanical appliances or 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p32.68
feelings * Putative Physical Events Area of cold Area of heat Object movements or levitations Electrical or mechanical appliances or equipment functioning improperly or not at all Pictures from cameras/ mobile device with unusual images, distortions or effects Plumbing equipment or systems functioning improperly or not at all Breaking of objects, e.g., glass, mirrors or housewares “Mechanical” or non descript noises, e.g., rapping, knocks, rattling, apparent footsteps, or sound of opening/closing doors or drawers Strange breeze or a rush of wind or air Anomalous fires Non threatening physical touches, like a tap or light pressure on the body Threatening physical touches, e.g., 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p33.31
air Anomalous fires Non threatening physical touches, like a tap or light pressure on the body Threatening physical touches, e.g., cut, bite, scratch, burn, shove or strong pressure on the body To promote model building and theory formation, the base experiences are grouped according to their presumed origin. Specifically, events are conceptualized as either Subjective (S, psychological) or Objective (O, physical) phenomena, consistent with previous work . Manifestations categorized S are experienced by a singular observer via their senses, or could be explained via artifacts of imagination, cognition, and personality. A disturbance classified as O would be objectively experienced by a group 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p34.02
explained via artifacts of imagination, cognition, and personality. A disturbance classified as O would be objectively experienced by a group of people, recorded on a device such as a camera/audio recorder, or measured with equipment such as a thermometer. Additional research must validate this proposed S/O scheme, because distinguishing the nature of base experiences is neither always straightforward nor unambiguous. For example, some haunt or poltergeist cases involve phenomena such as bites, cuts, scratches, or welts . These “external” anomalies are objective and measurable, yet potentially psychosomatic in nature . On the other hand, psychological experiences — including abrupt onsets of emotions and 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p34.26
measurable, yet potentially psychosomatic in nature . On the other hand, psychological experiences — including abrupt onsets of emotions and “sensed presences”— can allegedly derive from environmental (i.e., objectively physical) agencies; for example, stimulation from electromagnetic fields or infrasound . Further, seemingly indisputable physical events like object movements, electrical failures, and photographic anomalies are subject to orthodox causes if not extensively vetted but are commonly interpreted as “paranormal” based on demand characteristics, expectation, or suggestion effects, or other contextual variables. Some items in Table 1 could be refined further to tease out the best fitting S/O categories, or better emphasize the “aberrant 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p34.51
in Table 1 could be refined further to tease out the best fitting S/O categories, or better emphasize the “aberrant salience” of specific anomalies. For example, auditory phenomena might be better understood as S vs. O events by asking about corroboration from instrumentation, e.g., “I heard on an audio recorder mysterious sounds that could be recognized or identified, such as ghostly voices or music (with or without singing)” and “I heard on an audio recorder mysterious ‘mechanical’ or non descript noises, such as tapping, knocking, rattling, bang ing, crashing, footsteps or the sound of opening/closing doors or drawers” (see Laythe & Owen, 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p34.75
as tapping, knocking, rattling, bang ing, crashing, footsteps or the sound of opening/closing doors or drawers” (see Laythe & Owen, 2013, for examples of S/O instrumentation based vetting procedures). Likewise, there are likely differences between the endorsements of statements such as “I saw objects moving on their own across a surface or falling” versus “I saw objects flying or floating in midair” . Nonetheless, answering questions about S/O categories first requires reliable models of the various events themselves. Only then can we reliably begin to examine their contextual and potentially parapsychological facets. 	Ghostly Episodes: Need for a Standard:  p34.99
Spirits in New Bottles Bottle Trees and Cell Phones Bright wind chimes composed of enticing, candy colored, pastel bits of glass are for sale at the Winchester Mystery House gift shop . Some of the glass is formed into colorful bottles reminiscent of those in the southern supernatural tradition of bottle trees, a custom depicted in movies such as Ray , a biopic about African American musician Ray Charles, or Because of Winn Dixie , a children’s fi lm about a beloved dog. The famous southern writer Eudora Welty photographed them. 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p0
of Winn Dixie , a children’s fi lm about a beloved dog. The famous southern writer Eudora Welty photographed them. A contemporary southern author, Dennis Covington, describes them: “If you happen to have evil spirits, you put bottles on the branches of a [bare] tree in your yard. The more colorful the glass, the better, I suppose. The evil spirits get trapped in the bottles and won’t do you any harm. This is what Southerners in the country do with evil spirits” . Bottle trees are a product of southern African American culture. Jim Martin says that glassblowing and bottle making existed 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p0.28
. Bottle trees are a product of southern African American culture. Jim Martin says that glassblowing and bottle making existed as early as the ninth century in Africa. The practice of hanging objects from trees to ward off evil spirits is also African, and the bottle tree itself is Kongo derived. He adds that as the wind moves the tree, the spirits in the bottles moan . Martin maintains this type of bottle tree is less common today than in the past. However, certain variants for “upscale neighborhoods” have come into vogue: for example, sculpted metal trees are sold in nurseries, and 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p0.61
However, certain variants for “upscale neighborhoods” have come into vogue: for example, sculpted metal trees are sold in nurseries, and rural and urban sophisticates alike place their empties—mainly wine bottles—on them . The idea of bottle trees is appealing: they capture spirits that frighten or could harm us while still bravely keeping them in front of us. Right before our own doorsteps the bottles fl ash color and light, and then moan testimony to the uncanniness of both nature and the supernatural at the same time. Bottle trees are arresting, beautiful, and bizarre reminders that unseen forces move in the world. Ghost 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p0.93
at the same time. Bottle trees are arresting, beautiful, and bizarre reminders that unseen forces move in the world. Ghost stories are like these bottle trees. The stories contain spirits; they capture them for us and keep them before our eyes, scaring us but containing that fright in narrative form, which captures our attention and also reminds us of the variegated hues and shapes of the numinous world. Like the spirit bottle chimes for sale in the Winchester Mystery House gift shop, contemporary ghost lore—while rooted in tradition—is also wedded to and embedded in mass culture. Ghost narratives and supernatural beliefs are 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p1.18
contemporary ghost lore—while rooted in tradition—is also wedded to and embedded in mass culture. Ghost narratives and supernatural beliefs are the ancestors of mass mediated forms such as the Scooby Doo cartoons mentioned in chapter 4—but today they are marketed as mass media’s creation, its offspring. However snarled their genealogies, mass culture ghosts and folk ghosts are clearly family and despite generations of rationalism and the infl uence of the enlightenment , consumers still buy into the supernatural . Consumption is a hallmark of contemporary American culture, and the other darling of the age is technology. Consider the cell phone, for 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p1.41
a hallmark of contemporary American culture, and the other darling of the age is technology. Consider the cell phone, for example. It is a “superartifact” a ubiquitous object indicative of the time and culture from whence it has sprung. It fl aunts its high tech nature as it brings unseen voices into every space of life. Technology accomplishes what we once thought only the supernatural could. However, the cell phone has an intriguing relationship to the supernatural. A few years ago, a member of the Society for Psychical Research in England asserted that cell phones were to blame for a decrease in 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p1.64
member of the Society for Psychical Research in England asserted that cell phones were to blame for a decrease in ghost sightings. According to Tony Cornell, ghostly visitations have dropped dramatically since the introduction of the cell phone; he maintains, “With the introduction of mobile phones 15 years ago, ghost sightings began to decline to the point where now we are receiving none.” His theory is that the “electrical noise” produced by cell phones drowns out ghosts Even if one were to accept Cornell’s theory, however, one might still have to conclude that the exiled ghosts may beat cell phones by joining 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p1.87
accept Cornell’s theory, however, one might still have to conclude that the exiled ghosts may beat cell phones by joining them. Now stories about ghostly voices on cell phones—much like earlier narratives about haunted telephones—circulate both orally and on the Internet, and numerous games with ghostly motifs have been developed for cell phones. Other paranormal researchers assert that TV, not the cell phone, is behind the spectral decline. Steve Parsons, of the Parascience Society of Wirral, England, argues that the drop in ghost sightings is due to the decline in the number of supernatural themed television programs, such as The X Files 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p2.1
ghost sightings is due to the decline in the number of supernatural themed television programs, such as The X Files . He says, “In the run up to the year 2000 there was loads of stuff on the telly about the paranormal and that made the public more aware. But now people may have an experience and not realise that it’s of a paranormal nature. And, anyway, we use lots of high tech equipment in our research and that has no effect. Good, solid, reliable ghosts are there, and they are as hard as ever to catch” . Parsons’s assertion demonstrates how 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p2.33
Good, solid, reliable ghosts are there, and they are as hard as ever to catch” . Parsons’s assertion demonstrates how the mass media and the supernatural are linked; other studies also argue that television has an impact on belief His comments about the use of high tech equipment by ghost research societies show that those deeply engaged with the supernatural realm avidly embrace technology. Both the gussied up spirit bottles and the stories about cellphone ghosts indicate that rationalism, consumerism, and technology have not exorcised ghosts, in spite of earlier attempts to disprove their existence. For example, in eighteenth century England, 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p2.56
technology have not exorcised ghosts, in spite of earlier attempts to disprove their existence. For example, in eighteenth century England, the Royston Dissenting Book Club (whose members included clergymen, lawyers, doctors, and successful tradesmen and their wives) debated the question, “Is there any foundation in fact for the popular belief of ghosts and apparitions?” Fifteen members said yes; twenty six said no—a fact that prompted nineteenth century historian Alfred Kingston to marvel with distaste and shock that even fi fteen “educated people” could believe in ghosts Kingston would have been duly horrifi ed had he lived to learn that according to Gallup, 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p2.79
could believe in ghosts Kingston would have been duly horrifi ed had he lived to learn that according to Gallup, three out of four Americans in the early twenty fi rst century have some sort of paranormal belief, which includes at least one of the following: “extra sensory perception (ESP), haunted houses, ghosts, mental telepathy, clairvoyance, astrology, communicating with the dead, witches, reincarnation, and channeling. There are no signifi cant differences in belief by age, gender, education, or region of the country” . Of course, the paradox is that no one knows for sure whether any of these things actually exist, but 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p3.02
. Of course, the paradox is that no one knows for sure whether any of these things actually exist, but that doesn’t stop us from going on ghost tours, visiting haunted houses, and telling ghost stories. Ghosts, Folklore, and Popular Culture Haunting Experiences focuses on the dynamic relationship in contemporary society between ghosts in folklore and ghosts in popular culture. While folklore resembles popular culture in that both rely upon conventional content, genres, and styles of communication as well as traditional formulas, folklore is transmitted, intimately, face to face or in small groups, while popular culture tends to be mediated through a 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p3.27
folklore is transmitted, intimately, face to face or in small groups, while popular culture tends to be mediated through a channel that provides a greater degree of anonymity between producers on a mass scale and a wider audience. While undeniably linked in contemporary culture, the interaction between folklore and popular culture has historically been less discussed but no less signifi cant. For example, consider the widespread dissemination of broadside ballads in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the use of traditional narratives to sell patent medicines within the medicine show tradition, and the historical identifi cation of inter cultural appropriation and the use 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p3.52
sell patent medicines within the medicine show tradition, and the historical identifi cation of inter cultural appropriation and the use of culture brokers throughout history. Mass transmission, responses to new media and new technologies, appropriation, and commodifi cation are part and parcel of contemporary culture but they are not new and neither are they responsible, as critics have so often predicted, for the death of traditional culture. Intricately woven together, popular culture uses folklore continuously to tap into traditional cultural values and to satisfy audience expectations. But just as popular culture appropriates folklore, folklore too appropriates popular culture. Children’s cartoon characters 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p3.77
and to satisfy audience expectations. But just as popular culture appropriates folklore, folklore too appropriates popular culture. Children’s cartoon characters such as Casper the Friendly Ghost,1 movies such as The Shining , and television talk shows such as The Oprah Winfrey Show all feed themes, motifs, and descriptive details back into the small group intimate transmission of traditional ghost narratives, modernizing the details and incorporating contemporary issues, language, and concerns . As Narváez and Laba argue, folklore and popular culture are “related rather than disparate,” best understood as spanning a continuum of artistic communication in “different sized groups in which communications are 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p4.01
rather than disparate,” best understood as spanning a continuum of artistic communication in “different sized groups in which communications are transmitted via various confi gurations of . . . technological media” . The media and the technology associated with popular culture continually create change, but are also responsible for the vigorous sustaining of vernacular traditions. As Linda Dégh argues, The phenomenon we identify as folklore permeates all society assisted by mass media; it is not ruled out as folklore simply because its bearers manipulate new instruments to fi t the needs of modern consumers. Folklore blossoms and proliferates before our eyes as 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p4.27
bearers manipulate new instruments to fi t the needs of modern consumers. Folklore blossoms and proliferates before our eyes as it emerges from new conditions more vigorously and forcefully, empowered with more authority and prestige, than ever before. It is this relationship between folklore and popular culture, the mutual borrowing, dynamism and constancy in contemporary contexts that informs this volume. In the chapters that follow, readers will fi nd two hundred year old folktales discussed on the same page, and perhaps in the same vein, as an episode of the television show The Addams Family or a discussion of Moaning Myrtle in 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p4.54
the same vein, as an episode of the television show The Addams Family or a discussion of Moaning Myrtle in J. K. Rowling’s Harry Potter series (1999a, The combination is neither accidental nor a result of quirky personal associations. Contemporary tradition is deeply rooted in vernacular culture and interwoven with television, movies, the Internet, and cell phones. Not a book on popular culture and not a book on traditional ghost lore, Haunting Experiences is meant to refl ect the effortless comingling of ancient tradition and contemporary mass and commodifi ed culture in quotidian reality. This is the world our children inhabit. It 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p4.8
ancient tradition and contemporary mass and commodifi ed culture in quotidian reality. This is the world our children inhabit. It is the world we, as adults—as rationalists and romanticists, believers and disbelievers, consumers and commodifi ers—inhabit. t t t t t Collections of ghost stories have long been publishers’ staples, along with literary ghostly tales commonly known as gothics. Contemporary horror literature and movies continue to top the consumer popularity charts. Such a vast literary output has, of course, resulted in an almost equally large number of literary and analytical studies of the genre. Literary scholars have produced dozens and dozens 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p5.06
an almost equally large number of literary and analytical studies of the genre. Literary scholars have produced dozens and dozens of recent studies examining ghosts in American literature as metaphors for national consciousness, ranging from racism to historical memory. For example, one these studies, Renée Bergland’s The National Uncanny: Indian Ghosts and American Subjects , concentrates on early nineteenth century American fi ction which features Native American ghosts because “in American letters, and in the American imagination, Native American ghosts function both as representatives of national guilt and as triumphant agents of Americanization” . Yet another study of American ethnicity and literature, 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p5.31
as representatives of national guilt and as triumphant agents of Americanization” . Yet another study of American ethnicity and literature, Cultural Haunting: Ghosts and Ethnicity in Recent American Literature, proposes that “cultural haunting” is a separate, contemporary genre of ethnic literature in which the ghost is an “enigmatic transitional fi gure moving between past and present, death and life, one culture and another” . This book examines three recent American novels, each about a different ghost, in detail: Toni Morrison’s Beloved , Louise Erdrich’s Tracks , and Cristina Garcia’s Dreaming in Cuban . From the wider disciplinary perspective of sociology, Avery Gordon’s 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p5.57
Louise Erdrich’s Tracks , and Cristina Garcia’s Dreaming in Cuban . From the wider disciplinary perspective of sociology, Avery Gordon’s Ghostly Matters: Haunting and the Sociological Imagination presents haunting as “a paradigmatic way in which life is more complicated than those of us who study it have usually granted. It is neither premodern superstition nor individual psychosis; it is a generalizable social phenomenon of great import” . He goes on to propose, “If haunting describes how that which appears to be not there is often a seething presence, . . . the ghost is just the sign, or the empirical evidence . 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p5.82
there is often a seething presence, . . . the ghost is just the sign, or the empirical evidence . . . that tells you a haunting is taking place” . In spite of all the collections of ghost stories and myriad scholarly studies, as well as treatments in other academic disciplines, very little has been published that treats ghosts from an analytical, folkloric perspective, and even less exists which treats traditional ghost lore and popular culture materials simultaneously. Full length, serious treatments of traditional ghost stories (as opposed to literary stories) have to some extent lagged behind popular interest. This volume 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p6.07
treatments of traditional ghost stories (as opposed to literary stories) have to some extent lagged behind popular interest. This volume is meant to begin addressing that gap. It is intended for a variety of audiences ranging from the general reader interested in the supernatural, to university students, to specialists in the fi elds of belief and narrative studies. Ghosts and Folklorists Walking into a local public or university library to fi nd a book on ghosts is a bit like trying to fi nd a tree in the forest. In fact, running a keyword search of the Amazon.com2 book listings in 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p6.31
to fi nd a tree in the forest. In fact, running a keyword search of the Amazon.com2 book listings in summer 2005 produced 11,158 titles prompted by a search of the word “ghost,” 45,170 titles prompted by a search of “hauntings” and a staggering 68,828 tomes triggered by the keywords “haunted house.” Many of these volumes are novels, children’s books, haunted house pop up books, and Halloween guides; most are regional popular collections such as Haunted Houses of California: A Ghostly Guide to Haunted Houses and Wandering Spirits or Haunted Castles and Houses of Scotland but surprisingly few of these books are 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p6.55
to Haunted Houses and Wandering Spirits or Haunted Castles and Houses of Scotland but surprisingly few of these books are authored by academics in general and even fewer are written by academically trained folklorists. Perhaps we should not be altogether surprised by the scarcity of books on ghosts written by folklorists. The study of supernatural belief and tradition is heavily trivialized in the academy (see And as supernatural traditions become increasingly popular (and important) in fi lm, television, literature, tourism, and virtually all other manner of popular culture, many academics become proportionately unwilling to view such topics as worthy of serious study. 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p6.79
all other manner of popular culture, many academics become proportionately unwilling to view such topics as worthy of serious study. But because such traditions remain understudied in the academy, those traditions become increasingly represented only by popular culture. Nevertheless, no matter how little interest academics have in studying the supernatural, it is clearly a signifi cant part of contemporary culture. As folklorist Barbara Walker noted, I have had students tell me of sighting Big Foot, of living and communicating for several years with a ghost who adopted the family, of fi rst person interactions with vanishing hitchhikers. The valley that is my 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p7.03
with a ghost who adopted the family, of fi rst person interactions with vanishing hitchhikers. The valley that is my home also shelters water witches, folks who plant by the signs, a weeping cemetery statue, a canyon ghost, a haunted bridge, a house cursed by gypsies, Three Nephites, a temple where Christ has appeared, a coven of witches and a cluster of UFO watchers. I highly suspect my experience is not unique, and whether I’m skeptical or not really doesn’t matter because these things are part of my immediate world regardless. Walker’s students provide a useful index to the seriousness with which 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p7.29
these things are part of my immediate world regardless. Walker’s students provide a useful index to the seriousness with which the supernatural is taken by at least some of the general population, despite the academy’s lack of interest. Of course folklorists, as members of the academy who specialize in the study of vernacular traditions, pride themselves on having their ears to the ground and being interested in, and cognizant of, the changing and continuing concerns of a culture. Although the maintenance and dynamics of supernatural belief are a central part of that picture, the trivialization factor has undermined the number of 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p7.54
and dynamics of supernatural belief are a central part of that picture, the trivialization factor has undermined the number of folklorists willing to work on supernatural belief and thereby created an unusual gap in contemporary folkloristic treatment of supernatural topics. This is unfortunate because, despite individual ontological positions, supernatural belief is fundamental to cultural tradition. As Walker argues, “How groups regard the supernatural contributes to thought and behavior, and by attending to those patterns, we gather a fuller understanding of what is meaningful to the group, what gives it cohesion and animation, and thus we develop a rounder perspective of cultural nuance, 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p7.8
meaningful to the group, what gives it cohesion and animation, and thus we develop a rounder perspective of cultural nuance, both within the group and crossculturally” . Popular culture is no less central to cultural meaning than are older cross generational traditions, and yet the new wave of trendy and commodifi ed expressions of ghost belief seem to further diminish the willingness of scholars to take on supernatural study. But while folklorists, like their other colleagues in the academy, have not taken on the exploration of ghost belief tradition to the extent that the topic warrants, there have been a number of 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p8.05
on the exploration of ghost belief tradition to the extent that the topic warrants, there have been a number of important studies that apply the vernacular perspectives of folklore to ghost tradition. The earliest folklorists working on ghost traditions in North America were collectors, indexers, and compilers of folk belief—rationalists and functionalists interested in these traditions primarily for antiquarian survivalist and romantic reasons . Ghost beliefs, like supernatural beliefs in general, were understood as “quaint notions” and “idle conceits,” leftovers from a previously romantic primitive culture that still retained some, albeit regressive, function. These scholars, such as Wayland Hand, were responsible for 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p8.3
previously romantic primitive culture that still retained some, albeit regressive, function. These scholars, such as Wayland Hand, were responsible for publishing huge collections of folk beliefs, containing pages and pages of beliefs about ghosts contributed by hundreds of collectors spread out within a region, and meticulously indexed according to topical themes such as “dispelling ghosts,” “spirits,” “warding off spirits,” “haunts, ” and “laying haunts.” Hand’s collections (both published and unpublished) are massive, containing tens of thousands of items of popular belief . Ray Browne published a similar collection in Alabama in 1958 of over 4,000 belief items collected from just over a 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p8.54
Ray Browne published a similar collection in Alabama in 1958 of over 4,000 belief items collected from just over a hundred individuals whom Browne met while collecting local folksongs. Similarly in 1935, Harry Middleton Hyatt published a collection of over 10,000 beliefs from a single county in western Illinois. Hand, Hyatt, and Browne were all products of a period in folklore that focused on decontextualized items of folklore, thus they brought an item orientation to the study of belief. Their collections and indexes, while invaluable in the breadth of collecting they provided, contained little information on the nature of the belief 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p8.79
and indexes, while invaluable in the breadth of collecting they provided, contained little information on the nature of the belief or the cultural context of its collection. Nevertheless, these collections provide important comparative information, and often provided interesting annotations that allowed the reader to piece together more complex cultural data. In Hand’s Popular Beliefs and Superstitions from The Frank C. Brown Collection of North Carolina Folklore, Volume 7, for example, item 5,744 indicates that “a newspaper left close to the door or window will keep the spirits out, for they have to count every word” . While the piece is an interesting 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p9.03
window will keep the spirits out, for they have to count every word” . While the piece is an interesting little tidbit on its own, it fi ts very nicely with one contemporary ghost tour operator’s recent suggestion that the tradition in the Antebellum South of wallpapering the walls with newspaper was not solely for insulation, but rather to confuse a ghost who would have to read every word before it could hurt anyone. The ability to look up such beliefs in the Hand, Browne, or Hyatt collections allows one to establish age, variation, and geographical distribution of beliefs encountered in even 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p9.27
the Hand, Browne, or Hyatt collections allows one to establish age, variation, and geographical distribution of beliefs encountered in even the most contemporary contexts. Items from these collections provide a wealth of information on historical provenance and geography of belief traditions, antecedents of popular traditions, cultural stability and variation, as well as a variety of other research questions. Roughly during the same period that Hand, Browne, and Hyatt were publishing collections of belief items, other North American collectors of supernatural belief materials were publishing collections with a focus on ghost narratives rather than items of belief. Working in Canada in the early 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p9.5
were publishing collections with a focus on ghost narratives rather than items of belief. Working in Canada in the early to mid twentieth century, Helen Creighton documented hundreds of Nova Scotian ghost stories. Creighton’s collections, such as Bluenose Ghosts , are of interest due to her use of personal voice in her collections, her expressed respect for the supernatural stories and their narrators, and her attention to behaviors associated with female ghosts in the stories. In her books, she also frequently describes the contexts in which she heard the ghost stories. 	Ghosts in Contemporary Folklore:  p9.74
SPACES As a number of scholars recently realised, the most significant aspect of relics and miraculous icons was the role they played in the creation of particular sacred spaces1. In many cases relics and venerated icons were established as a core, a kind of pivot in the forming of a concrete spatial environment. This milieu included permanently visible architectural forms and various pictures as well as changing liturgical clothes and vessels, lighting effects and fragrance, ritual gestures and prayers, which every time created a unique spatial complex. Sometimes the environment 	HIEROTOPY :  p31
vessels, lighting effects and fragrance, ritual gestures and prayers, which every time created a unique spatial complex. Sometimes the environment could form itself spontaneously, yet there are several examples when we are able to speak of deliberate concepts and elaborated projects, which should be considered among the most important historical documents. In our view, very few studies in this direction have appeared so far, because an adequate notion covering this field of creativity has been lacking. The widespread term \'sacred space\' did not function well because of its too general character, describing almost the entire realm of the religious. Some 	HIEROTOPY :  p31.25
space\' did not function well because of its too general character, describing almost the entire realm of the religious. Some years ago I proposed a new term \'hierotopy\', which became the core of the present project2. The term \'hierotopy\' (ierotopia) consists of two Greek roots: hieros (sacred) and topos (place, space, notion). In that respect it resembles many other words already established in our vocabulary in the last hundred years — the term \'iconography\' is one of them. The meaning of the notion might be formulated as follows: Hierotopy is creation of sacred spaces regarded as a special form of creativity, 	HIEROTOPY :  p31.53
the notion might be formulated as follows: Hierotopy is creation of sacred spaces regarded as a special form of creativity, and a field of historical research which reveals and analyses the particular examples of that creativity. The intention of the project is to realize the existence of special and quite large phenomenon, for which boundaries of the research field have to be established and specific methods are to be worked out. The most serious problem of hierotopy is probably the category of the sacred itself, which surmises actual presence of God and cannot be separated from the miraculous, in other 	HIEROTOPY :  p31.82
category of the sacred itself, which surmises actual presence of God and cannot be separated from the miraculous, in other words, something that is not created by human will. The outstanding anthropologist Mircea Eliade, who dedicated several works to the phenomenon of the sacred, introduced a special notion of \'hierophany\', making a clear statement: \'Every sacred space implies a hierophany, an irruption of the sacred that results in detaching a territory from the surrounding cosmic milieu and making it qualitatively different\'3. As an example of hierophany Eliade provides the famous biblical story of Jacob\'s Dream about the Ladder connecting the Earth 	HIEROTOPY :  p32.06
As an example of hierophany Eliade provides the famous biblical story of Jacob\'s Dream about the Ladder connecting the Earth and the Heaven, about Lord speaking from Heaven and the construction of an altar at the holy spot . Using the same subject, let us try to separate \'hierophany\' and \'hierotopy\', articulating the specificity of our approach. In the biblical story the description of the hierotopic project starts with Jacob’s awakening. Inspired by his dream vision, he , begins to create a sacred space, which would convert a particular place into “the house of God and the gate of heaven”. 	HIEROTOPY :  p32.24
create a sacred space, which would convert a particular place into “the house of God and the gate of heaven”. He takes the stone that has been his pillow, sets it up as a monument, and pours oil on it. Jacob also renamed the place and took special vows. So, Jacob, and all his successors — creators of churches and shrines, created a particular spatial milieu. That making differs from hierophany as a creation by human hands from God\'s will. Communion with the miraculous inspired the concept of a spatial image, but itself remained beyond the realm of human creativity. This 	HIEROTOPY :  p32.41
with the miraculous inspired the concept of a spatial image, but itself remained beyond the realm of human creativity. This creativity, nevertheless, was intended to actualize the memory of a hierophany by all possible means, embodying an image of the divine revelation. As it seems, the permanent relation and intensive interaction between hierophany (the mystical appearance) and hierotopy (actually created space) determined the specificity of creation of sacred spaces as a form of creativity. One may note that Eliade\'s approach, analyzing the structure of the myth and its profound symbolism, has a principally different focus which, however, can be used 	HIEROTOPY :  p32.59
analyzing the structure of the myth and its profound symbolism, has a principally different focus which, however, can be used in some hierotopical reconstructions. Hierotopy as a type of creativity is deeply rooted in human nature. In the process of self identification as a spiritual being, the Man, first spontaneously and then deliberately, creates a concrete milieu of his connection with the transcendental world. Creation of sacred spaces can be compared with pictorial creativity, which also belongs to visual culture and appears spontaneously at a very early stage of shaping of personality. However, in contrast with the creation of pictures, where 	HIEROTOPY :  p32.77
appears spontaneously at a very early stage of shaping of personality. However, in contrast with the creation of pictures, where an entire infrastructure is present from first drawing lessons to academies, criticism and the art market, creation of sacred spaces simply has not been included in the cultural context of modern European civilization. The positivist ideology of the 19th century, when contemporary disciplines took their shape, did not see in the ephemeral \'sacred space\' an independent subject of research. Most disciplines were linked to concrete material objects, either pictures or architectural monuments, folk rituals or written texts. Creation of sacred 	HIEROTOPY :  p32.94
disciplines were linked to concrete material objects, either pictures or architectural monuments, folk rituals or written texts. Creation of sacred spaces did not receive its place in the established scheme of humanities, whose structure was determined by the \'object centered\' model of description of the universe. As a logical consequence of this fact the subject was not formulated, a discipline did not appear, and the special terminology was not elaborated. At the same time it is not possible to say that the problematic of sacred space has not been touched by the humanities. Various aspects of the topic in question have 	HIEROTOPY :  p33.13
the problematic of sacred space has not been touched by the humanities. Various aspects of the topic in question have been discussed by archeologists, anthropologists, art historians and historians of religion. However, they, as a rule, tried to solve the problems of their own respective disciplines, emphasizing particular aspects without consideration of the whole. No doubt hierotopical studies will use some traditional approaches of art history, anthropology and liturgics. At the same time one may claim that hierotopy does not coincide with any of them. Hierotopy can not be reduced neither solely to the world of artistic images, nor to 	HIEROTOPY :  p33.32
coincide with any of them. Hierotopy can not be reduced neither solely to the world of artistic images, nor to the combination of material objects, organizing a sacred milieu, nor to the rituals and social mechanisms that determine them. The ritual plays a great role in hierotopical projects but purely artistic, theological and liturgical aspects usually neglected by anthropology seem no less important. Furthermore, a hierotopical concept could not be interpreted in terms of the socalled Gesamtkunstwerk, or synthesis of arts, which acquired enormous significance in the age of Baroque, and later in the Art Nouveau. Medieval sacred space cannot be 	HIEROTOPY :  p33.51
which acquired enormous significance in the age of Baroque, and later in the Art Nouveau. Medieval sacred space cannot be considered as just a combination of artifacts and various ephemeral effects creating a particular artistic milieu. This modern approach seems to be a result of the great transformation that happened in Western European mentality after the Renaissance when aesthetical values began to be perceived as a substitute of the sacred ones4. Though sometimes similar, hierotopy deals with a principally different matrix. Hierotopical vision can be practically useful for many humanities. Characteristically, entire forms of creativity could not be properly discussed 	HIEROTOPY :  p33.71
matrix. Hierotopical vision can be practically useful for many humanities. Characteristically, entire forms of creativity could not be properly discussed beyond the hierotopical framework, which is not connected with the positivist classification of objects. For instance, such an enormous phenomenon as the dramaturgy of lighting goes beyond the boundaries of the traditional disciplines. At the same time we know for sure from written sources Monastic Typika) how detailed was the practice of lighting, dynamically changing during the services according to a sophisticated scenario5. In particular moments light accentuated concrete images or holy objects, organizing a perception of the entire space of 	HIEROTOPY :  p33.9
sophisticated scenario5. In particular moments light accentuated concrete images or holy objects, organizing a perception of the entire space of the church as well as the logic of reading its most significant elements6. Dramaturgy is an appropriate word in this context since the artistic and dramatic element in that field of creativity was no less important than the ritual and symbolic one7. The same concerns the realm of fragrance, which presents every time new combinations of incense, smells of wax candles and aromatic oils in lamps. Christian culture inherited the great traditions of the Ancient East through the Roman imperial 	HIEROTOPY :  p34.13
candles and aromatic oils in lamps. Christian culture inherited the great traditions of the Ancient East through the Roman imperial cult as well as through the sophisticated worship of the Old Testament Temple8. Jewish and Ancient Roman sources do not leave doubts that individual dramaturgies of lighting and fragrance were practically always an integral part of a particular concept of the sacred space9. Hierotopical approach allows us to create an adequate research framework for such phenomena, in which different cultural artifacts could be studied as interacting elements of a single project. A project of this kind was a matrix, or structural 	HIEROTOPY :  p34.39
could be studied as interacting elements of a single project. A project of this kind was a matrix, or structural model, of a particular sacred space, subordinating all visual, audio and tactile effects. It seems important to realize that practically all objects of religious art were originally conceived as elements of a hierotopical project and included in the \'network\' of a concrete sacred space. However, with some exceptions, we do not ‘ask’ our artistic monuments about this pivotal peculiarity, which was crucial for their external appearance. In order to solve this apparently simple problem one should get rid of a 	HIEROTOPY :  p34.65
was crucial for their external appearance. In order to solve this apparently simple problem one should get rid of a fundamental stereotype of the consciousness. The basis of the positivist universe is the object itself, around which the whole process of research is being constructed. However, it becomes more and more clear now that the centre of the universe in medieval religious minds was immaterial but real space around which the world of objects, sounds, smells, lights and other effects came to being. Hierotopical approach allows us to see artistic objects in the context of another model of universe and to 	HIEROTOPY :  p34.92
to being. Hierotopical approach allows us to see artistic objects in the context of another model of universe and to read them anew. Without denying any options of iconographical or stylistic approaches, hierotopy helps to reveal an unknown source of information, existing in our art objects. If our efforts lead just to posing questions about the spatial aspect of a concrete monument and introduce one more dimension in traditional art historical discourse, the initial part of the project would be accomplished. We should repeat, however, that Hierotopy does not coincide with traditional art history, though it might considerably renovate its 	HIEROTOPY :  p35.13
accomplished. We should repeat, however, that Hierotopy does not coincide with traditional art history, though it might considerably renovate its methodology. Thinking further on the boundaries of art history, one may ask why the history of medieval art has been reduced to making of objects and the role of artist was limited by more or less high artisantry. May be the time has come to extend the context by introducing a special figure of the creator of sacred space10. Some projects of sacred space were of high artistic value though realised on a different level in comparison with the creation 	HIEROTOPY :  p35.31
projects of sacred space were of high artistic value though realised on a different level in comparison with the creation of art objects and architectural forms. Such figures are well known though their true role has remained hidden behind the general name of donors or commissioners. However, not all the donors were creators of the sacred space though there are examples when their functions coincided. A representative figure in the West is the Abbot Suger, who created a concept of the first Gothic space in the cathedral of St Denis11. His functions could not be reduced just to the endowment of 	HIEROTOPY :  p35.49
first Gothic space in the cathedral of St Denis11. His functions could not be reduced just to the endowment of the project, or to the casting of masters, or to the theological program, or to elaboration of new rituals, artistic modeling, iconographic or stylistic innovations. He was engaged in all these activities. His role can be compared with the role of film directors, who coordinate efforts of various masters, which we have long agreed to regard in the context of art history. In the Byzantine tradition emperors quite often played the role of creators of sacred space, following the example 	HIEROTOPY :  p35.68
art history. In the Byzantine tradition emperors quite often played the role of creators of sacred space, following the example of Justinian as the saint \'concepteur\' of the Great Church . Justinian himself competed with the King Solomon — a renown builder of the Old Testament Temple12. Solomon in his creation of the Temple space was inspired by the Lord himself, who conveyed to Moses on Mount Choreb the entire project of the Tabernacle from the general structure of the space to details of the sacred vestment production . God has chosen the master Bezalel for the practical realization of his 	HIEROTOPY :  p35.86
to details of the sacred vestment production . God has chosen the master Bezalel for the practical realization of his plan, creating for centuries a model relationship between creators of sacred space and creators of objects . Creation of sacred spaces by earthly rulers can be considered as iconic behavior in relation to the Ruler of the universe. That activity went far beyond ordinary commission and should become a subject of intensive research, based on a sequence of historical reconstructions of particular projects of sacred space. I have recently discussed one of these concepts in detail in a special paper 	HIEROTOPY :  p36.04
of particular projects of sacred space. I have recently discussed one of these concepts in detail in a special paper concerning Leo the Wise\'s project in Hagia Sophia and his spatial program of the Imperial Door 13. As one may judge from direct and indirect evidence, the emperor Leo combined in one program venerable relics and miraculous icons, mosaic murals and accompanying verse inscriptions, special rites and images of the miracle stories, which appeared in minds in front of the concrete shrines. All together they created a spatial milieu of the Main Entrance to the Great Church of the Empire. An 	HIEROTOPY :  p36.22
shrines. All together they created a spatial milieu of the Main Entrance to the Great Church of the Empire. An invisible part of this milieu were repeated miracles, as numerous pilgrims inform us. To some extant, the boundaries of the milieu were mystically marked by the zone of specific miracles. The protagonist of this spatial dramaturgy was Jerusalem icon of the Virgin who spoke to St Mary of Egypt and gave her salvation after her deep penitence in front of the icon. Noteworthy is, that this icon, originally situated at the entrance to the Basilica of the Holy Sepulchre, was 	HIEROTOPY :  p36.39
the icon. Noteworthy is, that this icon, originally situated at the entrance to the Basilica of the Holy Sepulchre, was installed by Leo the Wise at the same place beside the Imperial Door of Saint Sophia of Constantinople. Thereby a mystical link was established between sacred spaces of two great churches. Jerusalem relic with its own aureole of literary associations and symbolic connotations was translated into the Constantinopolitan church, becoming a part of another spatial image. That spontaneous aspect undoubtedly played a considerable role in the creation of any particular sacred space. Every spatial phenomenon should be perceived as a result 	HIEROTOPY :  p36.57
a considerable role in the creation of any particular sacred space. Every spatial phenomenon should be perceived as a result of creative efforts of several masters. We do not want to fall back into the rut of an old fashioned art historical deification of the individual maestro: Solomon; Justinian; Leo the Wise, or Suger of St Denis. Creation of an environment conducive to the eruption of the sacred hierophany) is always complex, and not merely reducible to the genius of a single patron. But at the same time we might want to think about a \'concepteur\', a particular creator of 	HIEROTOPY :  p36.74
a single patron. But at the same time we might want to think about a \'concepteur\', a particular creator of the sacred space, whose role could be initiative, fundamental, and multifunctional. Like future film directors he was responsible not merely for the general spatial imagery but for complex links of various arts subordinated into a single sacred milieu. Without revealing this figure, or better to say, without keeping in mind a possibility of this cultural function, we will not be able to understand properly numerous phenomena of medieval culture. As we have noticed before, translation of sacred space was key element 	HIEROTOPY :  p36.92
to understand properly numerous phenomena of medieval culture. As we have noticed before, translation of sacred space was key element in the project of Leo the Wise, presenting just one example in a large practice, which consists of a main direction of the medieval hierotopy. A complex problem of the definition of the \'holy place\' as distinct from the \'sacred space\' emerges in this context14. Translation of a spatial image did not mean disappearance of the locus, moreover, topographical material concreteness stimulated the power and miraculous efficacy of a spatial image. Hierotopical creativity established a sophisticated system of interaction between 	HIEROTOPY :  p37.1
concreteness stimulated the power and miraculous efficacy of a spatial image. Hierotopical creativity established a sophisticated system of interaction between the static place matrix and the flying space, which at any moment could be materialized at a new place. In this context a set of projects on the recreation of the Holy Land in various countries of the East and the West comes to mind. Among them one might recall the Pharos chapel in Constantinople, which functioned not merely as an imperial storage of main Passion relics, but as the Byzantine Holy Sepulchre — the sacred centre of the Empire15. In 	HIEROTOPY :  p37.3
imperial storage of main Passion relics, but as the Byzantine Holy Sepulchre — the sacred centre of the Empire15. In the West the most striking example is famous Campo Santo in Pisa , for which in the 13th century the crusaders brought the real “Holy Land” by ships from Jerusalem and covered a large field, later surrounded by the gallery cemetery. Finally, a glorious Russian project should be mentioned. I mean the seventeenth century New Jerusalem complex near Moscow , which was the largest project for a recreation of the Holy Land in world history. Creators of that enormous sacred 	HIEROTOPY :  p37.49
which was the largest project for a recreation of the Holy Land in world history. Creators of that enormous sacred space combined in their project an iconic image and a precise replica, presenting both Byzantine and Western hierotopical traditions16. It is interesting that in the framework of one \'large space\' some projects belonging to different periods could co exist. Thus, the concept of Leo the Wise at the beginning of the tenth century was inscribed into the space of the Great Church created by Justinian in the sixth century. It was not the only alteration. The whole environment of Hagia Sophia 	HIEROTOPY :  p37.69
Church created by Justinian in the sixth century. It was not the only alteration. The whole environment of Hagia Sophia was filled out by concrete projects of sacred spaces. It concerns the space around the altar table, with its various crosses, votive crowns, liturgical covers and the catapetasma, which had to be perceived within a single spatial image installation, which should not be reduced to any flat picture. Typologically similar spatial images, every time in new forms, appeared in other parts of the building: at the Samaritan\'s well in the south east compartment, or around the iconreliquary with the chains 	HIEROTOPY :  p37.88
parts of the building: at the Samaritan\'s well in the south east compartment, or around the iconreliquary with the chains of St Peter in the northern aisle, or near the northwest pillar with relics of St Gregory the Wonderworker inside. The latter was covered by gilded brass plates and adorned by a venerated icon of this saint. In particular days a movable altar table was installed in front of the pillar and special services took place. Deliberately modeled micro spaces were activated in particular moments of the daily or annual liturgical services, becoming temporary protagonists in a grandiose spatial performance. The 	HIEROTOPY :  p38.08
activated in particular moments of the daily or annual liturgical services, becoming temporary protagonists in a grandiose spatial performance. The dynamic characteristic was of principal importance in hierotopical projects. We usually do not consider it in our discussions of Byzantine art since we are mostly operating with archeological remains. However, we should recognize that the material forms were just a part, and not always the most important one, of a spatial whole which was in permanent movement. Performativity, dramatic changes, the lack of strict fixation shaped a vivid, spiritually intensive, and concretely influential environment. It is noteworthy, that in Byzantium, 	HIEROTOPY :  p38.28
the lack of strict fixation shaped a vivid, spiritually intensive, and concretely influential environment. It is noteworthy, that in Byzantium, as it becomes clear, this phenomenon had a special system of notions describing such performative paradigms 17. Sometimes they were reflected in iconographical programs as, for a example, the early fourteenth century mosaics of the Kariye Camii (the Chora Monastery in Constantinople) suggest . As we know, the concept of the sacred space as well as of the iconographic program belonged to Theodore Metochites, who clearly pointed out the origins of his imagery, symbolically connected with the dedication of the monastery 	HIEROTOPY :  p38.48
to Theodore Metochites, who clearly pointed out the origins of his imagery, symbolically connected with the dedication of the monastery to the \'Chôra\'. Along the axis of the West to the East, over the entrance and to the right of the sanctuary barrier, there are different images of the Virgin with the Child inscribed by the same words “Chôra tou achôrêtou” (“container of uncontainable”, The inscription indicated the miracle of the Incarnation, when the earthly Virgin contained uncontainable God, and at once established a spatial dimension of the divine being. The images of the Mother of God were co related 	HIEROTOPY :  p38.68
at once established a spatial dimension of the divine being. The images of the Mother of God were co related with two images of Christ above the entrances to the narthex and to the naos, in both cases inscribed as “Chôra tôn zôntôn” (“space of the living”). It seems clear that the \'Chôra\' here does not mean country, land or village, but the most important theological notion and one of the names of God. It went back to Plato\'s fundamental category19, which was developed by neo Platonism and from there came to the Church Fathers. In the theology of icon worshippers 	HIEROTOPY :  p38.88
which was developed by neo Platonism and from there came to the Church Fathers. In the theology of icon worshippers (such as the Patriarch Nikephoros in the early ninth century) the notion of Chôra became a kind of cornerstone in the argument against iconoclasts, explaining the principal difference between the \'icon\' and the \'idol\'. According to this view, the ideal icon is always spatial, and at the same time absolutely concrete, like Christ at the same time eternally dwells in Heaven, and offers His flesh in every Eucharist sacrament. The Chôra as the spatial being of God is a link 	HIEROTOPY :  p39.08
Heaven, and offers His flesh in every Eucharist sacrament. The Chôra as the spatial being of God is a link connecting these two rationally opposite phenomena. The entire church and all its images are intended to represent this \'divine space\'. Highly educated Theodore Metochites emphasized that all embracing symbolical meaning in his iconographical program, which was an integral part of the special hierotopical project of the Chora monastery. The example proves not merely deep roots of the hierotopical approach in medieval minds, but the existence of quite well articulated system of notions, which we sometimes ignore in our discussions 20. 	HIEROTOPY :  p39.28
medieval minds, but the existence of quite well articulated system of notions, which we sometimes ignore in our discussions 20. It concerns, however, the pivotal principle of Byzantine \'theology in images\'. The \'paradigm of the flat picture\', still dominating in our minds, does not help to establish an adequate perception of the spatial imagery and of hierotopical projects. It seems, that crucially significant in that respect is to recognize the spatial nature of iconic imagery as a whole: in Byzantine minds the icon was not merely an object and a flat picture on panel or wall, but a spatial vision emanating 	HIEROTOPY :  p39.48
the icon was not merely an object and a flat picture on panel or wall, but a spatial vision emanating from the depiction into the environment in front of it and existing between the picture and its beholder. This basic perception determined iconic character of space in which various media were interacting. So, it is important to emphasize that creation of a sacred space is making of concrete spatial imagery that typologically, according to the type of representation and its perception, can be considered as something quite similar to Byzantine icons21. This connection became evident in some late medieval projects, 	HIEROTOPY :  p39.69
perception, can be considered as something quite similar to Byzantine icons21. This connection became evident in some late medieval projects, such as the Palm Sunday ceremony, or the \'Procession on a donkey\' in the sixteenthseventeenth century Moscovy. The tsar led the patriarch, seated on a donkey in remembrance of Christ\'s entrance into Jerusalem, from the Kremlin to St Basil cathedral on the Red Square. The hierotopical concept seems quite obvious and can not be reduced to a well known phenomenon of urban processions. It concerns reproduction in the centre of Moscow of the space of Jerusalem according to the Gospels. Some 	HIEROTOPY :  p39.89
urban processions. It concerns reproduction in the centre of Moscow of the space of Jerusalem according to the Gospels. Some scholars have already posed a problem of the iconography of the ritual, which should be interpreted as a \'living picture\' and a dynamic (one may add, and spatial) re enactment of the icon with “The Entrance into Jerusalem” — a very popular subject in Byzantine and Russian Medieval art22. All figures of the iconography became real participants of the Moscow rite, creating a kind of performance in space and illustrating the festive icon. This eloquent example clearly demonstrates, how deep 	HIEROTOPY :  p40.08
rite, creating a kind of performance in space and illustrating the festive icon. This eloquent example clearly demonstrates, how deep the connection was between the spatial imagery and icons, which late medieval Russian masters of hierotopy used to present in more illustrative and narrative way than their Byzantine predecessors. In Byzantium the relations could be more sophisticated, when a miraculous icon with its own image and iconographical program participated in the creation of a sacred space, as it happened in the miraculous Tuesday performance with the Hodegetria of Constantinople and many others23. In these cases the image on the panel was 	HIEROTOPY :  p40.27
miraculous Tuesday performance with the Hodegetria of Constantinople and many others23. In these cases the image on the panel was perceived as animated, it became an inseparable part of the iconic spatial milieu, in which the miraculous icon was actively participating and interacting with beholders. One might notice that an artistic phenomenon, that we are trying to reveal, creates a methodological trouble, a contradiction with a basic principle of the history of art — the opposition \'image versus beholder\'. The relationship between the image and the beholder could be most complicated, however, their structural opposition presents a kind of pivot 	HIEROTOPY :  p40.46
relationship between the image and the beholder could be most complicated, however, their structural opposition presents a kind of pivot of all art historical discussions. Yet the most characteristic feature of Byzantine hierotopy is the participation of the beholder in the spatial image. The beholder acts inside the image, as its integral element together with various depictions, lights, odours, gestures, and sounds. Furthermore, the beholder, possessing collective and individual memory, spiritual experience and knowledge, in a way participates in the creation of the spatial imagery. At the same time, the image exists in objective reality as a kind of dynamic structure, 	HIEROTOPY :  p40.64
of the spatial imagery. At the same time, the image exists in objective reality as a kind of dynamic structure, changing its elements according to an individual perception — some aspects of the spatial entity could be accentuated, or temporally hidden. Creators of sacred spaces kept in minds the factor of prepared perception, connecting all intellectual and emotional threads of the image concept. Maybe because of this a spectator from outside does not perceive that Byzantine spatial imagery, while sometimes adoring the decorative beauty of “flat icons”. It is noteworthy, that Byzantine \'spatial icons\', most unusual in modern European context, 	HIEROTOPY :  p40.83
adoring the decorative beauty of “flat icons”. It is noteworthy, that Byzantine \'spatial icons\', most unusual in modern European context, have a typological parallel in the contemporary art of performances and multi media installations, which have nothing to do with the Byzantine tradition historically or symbolically. What they share is the basic principle of absence of a single source of images, the imagery is created in space by numerous dynamically changing forms. The most significant is the role of the beholder, who actively participates in the re creation of the spatial imagery. All the differences of the contents, technologies and aesthetics 	HIEROTOPY :  p41.02
who actively participates in the re creation of the spatial imagery. All the differences of the contents, technologies and aesthetics notwithstanding, one may speak about one and the same type of the perception of images. The aspect, just touched upon here, shows how far we can go in our analysis of the hierotopical approach. As we have tried to demonstrate, in many cases discussion of visual culture can not be reduced to a positivist description of artifacts, or to the analysis of theological notions. It requires change of vision and of the language of description. Some phenomena can be properly 	HIEROTOPY :  p41.25
analysis of theological notions. It requires change of vision and of the language of description. Some phenomena can be properly interpreted only on the level of images ideas: I prefer to term them \'image paradigms\', which do not coincide with the illustrative pictures or ideological conceptions24. This special notion seems a useful instrumentum studiorum, which helps to explain a certain layer of historical sources. That image paradigm was not connected with illustration of any specific text, though it included a lot of literary and symbolic meanings and associations. It is hard to see in this paradigm just an embodiment of a 	HIEROTOPY :  p41.48
of literary and symbolic meanings and associations. It is hard to see in this paradigm just an embodiment of a theological concept, although the depth and complexity of its structure is quite obvious. The image paradigm belonged to the visual culture, it was visible and recognizable, but at the same time it was not formalized in any stable state, either in a pictorial scheme or in a mental structure. In this respect the image paradigm looks similar to the metaphor that loses its sense in re telling, or in its division into parts. For the Byzantines, such an irrational and 	HIEROTOPY :  p41.71
that loses its sense in re telling, or in its division into parts. For the Byzantines, such an irrational and at once \'hiero plastic\'25 perception of the world could be the most adequate reflection of its divine essence. It does not involve any mystic but a special type of consciousness, in which our categories of the artistic, the ritual, the intellectual were interwoven in the inseparable form of vision. The absence of the image paradigm as a notion in contemporary scholarship does not allow us to reveal a number of phenomena which determined both symbolic structures and concrete pictorial motifs. One 	HIEROTOPY :  p41.94
does not allow us to reveal a number of phenomena which determined both symbolic structures and concrete pictorial motifs. One point seems clear — this phenomenon is quite distinct from what one may call an iconographic device. It seems significant in this respect that in references to most glorious model shrines, like the Holy Sepulchre, Hagia Sophia or the Cathedral of the Kiev Cave monastery, medieval \'concepteurs\', as a rule, reproduced not planning, architectural forms or decoration, but the image idea of the particularly venerated sacred space, recognized by contemporaries and included into the new context. We still do not 	HIEROTOPY :  p42.13
idea of the particularly venerated sacred space, recognized by contemporaries and included into the new context. We still do not have a proper language to operate with image paradigms that challenge our fundamental methodological approach to the image as illustration and flat picture. In my view, beyond the image paradigms our discussion will remain foreign to the medieval way of thinking and any analysis of style, iconography or hierotopy would be limited to a simple external fixation of artifacts of the visual culture. However, the recognition is important in and of itself, and further studies in this direction may reveal some 	HIEROTOPY :  p42.31
visual culture. However, the recognition is important in and of itself, and further studies in this direction may reveal some practical approaches and renew our vision of medieval phenomena. It is quite obvious that the hierotopical problematic cannot be limited to the Byzantine tradition only. Ancient and medieval, and in general, the entire history of religious cultures in various countries consists of numerous hierotopical projects, which might become a subject of comparative studies. In this connection it seems correct to pose a question of different layers or levels existing in each sacred space. This concerns archetypical background shared by all 	HIEROTOPY :  p42.49
pose a question of different layers or levels existing in each sacred space. This concerns archetypical background shared by all traditions. For instance, the archetype of the Holy Mountain exists in absolutely different cultures, historically unrelated to each other. One may pose the question of hierotopical groups, as it was done many years ago for language families. Elucidation of the Indo European tradition in creation of sacred spaces looks as a quite fruitful direction of studies. At least, the existence of such a tradition makes it possible to explain very similar structure of the inner space in Hindu temples and Christian 	HIEROTOPY :  p42.67
such a tradition makes it possible to explain very similar structure of the inner space in Hindu temples and Christian churches, that could not be understood in terms of historical influences. No less important is the issue of religious and national models of hierotopy. The Islamic approach is quite distinct from the Christian one, though both religions, having roots in Judaism, are much closer to each other than to Buddhism. The first thing, that comes to my mind, is the striking problem of the “temple consciousness”, recently exposed by some scholars. It presupposes discussion of different models of the temple 	HIEROTOPY :  p42.84
striking problem of the “temple consciousness”, recently exposed by some scholars. It presupposes discussion of different models of the temple space in the framework of the so called \'Abraham\'s tradition\'26. Some striking typological differences might be noticed through comparative analysis of Christian hierotopy in the West and in the East. As has been already mentioned, in Byzantium we see iconic vision of the spatial imagery, destroying the barrier between the stable church (its material body) and the dynamic external milieu outside any physical borders. The inner space of the church could be displayed and re created in squares and streets, in 	HIEROTOPY :  p43.03
any physical borders. The inner space of the church could be displayed and re created in squares and streets, in fields and mountains, which should, at least temporarily, be transformed into an icon of the sacred universe, created by God himself. This re creation of the spatial proto image contains one of the most essential meanings of all rites and processions happening outside the church. It is noteworthy that the church itself is considered as a transparent structure and moving spiritual substance: one may recall about the relics inlaid in walls, pillars and cupolas of Byzantine churches27. A kind of 	HIEROTOPY :  p43.25
spiritual substance: one may recall about the relics inlaid in walls, pillars and cupolas of Byzantine churches27. A kind of manifestation of that vision we can see in post Byzantine churches in Romania, where the altar iconography is reproduced on the facades and the most sacred liturgical program is open to the external world which is conceived in this way as a church cosmos. Byzantium created basic models of the arrangement of sacred spaces, which in different countries were adopted and transformed according to their national characteristics and even climatic conditions. It is quite clear, that the ice architecture, which 	HIEROTOPY :  p43.47
and transformed according to their national characteristics and even climatic conditions. It is quite clear, that the ice architecture, which framed Russian hierotopical projects for the Epiphany and other winter festivals, simply could not exist in Constantinople or in the Balkans28. This also demonstrates how sublime Constantinopolitan patterns were being re worked in the folk milieu: the well established, \'academic\' hierotopy was naturally combined with spontaneous sacralization of the human environment. As a living being, a hierotopical project could change in time: the original concept matrix was subject to developments and additions, the concept itself was sometimes transformed according to new 	HIEROTOPY :  p43.69
time: the original concept matrix was subject to developments and additions, the concept itself was sometimes transformed according to new ideologems. Cathedrals of the Moscow Kremlin provide a good example: their spatial imagery con siderably changed in different periods. As recent studies of some late medieval inventories have shown, by the late seventeenth century the most liturgical textiles, which used to covericons and great parts of walls, were removed from the cathedrals. This created a principally different image of sacred space, that we sometimes wrongly consider as an ancient one29. Careful research of different historical layers of sacred space may 	HIEROTOPY :  p43.91
space, that we sometimes wrongly consider as an ancient one29. Careful research of different historical layers of sacred space may be compared with the restoration of an icon. As in such case, quite often just small remains of original hierotopical projects are available to us, yet they should be recognized as a unique source of historical information, which is capable to give a clue to understanding of the surviving elements of the ancient complex — architectural forms, frescoes, icons, liturgical vessels or particular rites. The hierotopical approach relates not merely to the sacred spaces of churches, cities or landscapes but to 	HIEROTOPY :  p44.12
or particular rites. The hierotopical approach relates not merely to the sacred spaces of churches, cities or landscapes but to the research of spatial imagery in minor art forms and in written texts. In the present introductory article we can but touch upon some aspects of this large topic. The problematic of sacred space in Byzantine manuscripts looks nearly unexplored. On the one hand, the spatial concept is quite evident: in several manuscripts frontpieces are conceived as a solemn gate to the sacred space of the book, sometimes they represent an icon of the heavenly city made up of churches 	HIEROTOPY :  p44.32
to the sacred space of the book, sometimes they represent an icon of the heavenly city made up of churches Homilies of James of Kokkinobaphos from Vatican and Paris, and the Sermons of St Gregory of Nazianzus from Sinai, of the same century, On the other hand, a method to describe this phenomenon has not been elaborated. The creator of a manuscript did not represent just a flat ornamentation and the so called iconographical program, but tried to establish a certain system of interrelations between the miniatures on double pages of a manuscript, making the image of sacred space which recalled 	HIEROTOPY :  p44.52
system of interrelations between the miniatures on double pages of a manuscript, making the image of sacred space which recalled the sacred milieu of the church (it is not accidental that the image of the church appeared on Byzantine covers). In many cases we probably may speak about a particular concept that generated individual spatial imagery and connected the manuscript with its liturgical function and its concrete environment — specific rituals, lightings, sounding words and various liturgical vessels. A comparison with liturgical vestments can be adduced here I mean primarily the well known fourteenth and early fifteenth century embroidered Byzantine 	HIEROTOPY :  p44.73
with liturgical vestments can be adduced here I mean primarily the well known fourteenth and early fifteenth century embroidered Byzantine sakkos of the Metropolitan Photios of Moscow 31. Bearing a sophisticated system of images, these liturgical robes created a microcosmos of the church space, which was included into the sacred milieu of the real huge church (the Moscow cathedral) and revealed their true meaning in the liturgical movement. Gold embroidered icons were permanently changing on the moving clothes, becoming a kind of living beings in the atmosphere of unstable lighting of natural sources, various fires, reflections of gold and silver vessels, 	HIEROTOPY :  p44.93
of living beings in the atmosphere of unstable lighting of natural sources, various fires, reflections of gold and silver vessels, in the multi layered environment of smoking incenses. In general, it concerns a dynamic, performative, spatial imagery, including officiating person as well as the entire liturgical context. It should be made clear, that the traditional approach, limited just to studies of technology, style or iconography, without consideration of the spatial background of this imagery, which was connected with a particular hierotopical project, will keep us far away from proper understanding of original concepts of the so called museum objects. The 	HIEROTOPY :  p45.13
hierotopical project, will keep us far away from proper understanding of original concepts of the so called museum objects. The same is true for liturgical vessels and numerous reliquaries. In the tenth century Constantinopolitan stone chalice from the treasury of San Marco in Venice (the \'Chalice of Patriarchs\') there is a gold medallion with an enamel Pantocrator, which appears on the bottom of the semi transparent bowl made of sardonyx 32. At the moment of communion the image had to appear in the fluctuating liquid as a visible testimony of the Eucharistic miracle of the transubstantiation of wine into the blood 	HIEROTOPY :  p45.33
in the fluctuating liquid as a visible testimony of the Eucharistic miracle of the transubstantiation of wine into the blood of Christ. However, a more striking indication to the spatial context of the image one might find in the eloquent juxtaposition of the liturgical chalice and the cupola of the Byzantine church, that also bore Pantocrator image . In the space of a particular church these two images of the Pantocrator had to be perceived as interrelated parts of one and the same hierotopical concept. Another example is the famous Limburg staurothek (968–985 􀉝􀉝., the central part with a piece 	HIEROTOPY :  p45.53
and the same hierotopical concept. Another example is the famous Limburg staurothek (968–985 􀉝􀉝., the central part with a piece of the True Cross is framed by fragments of ten other relics, most of which were kept in the church of the Virgin of the Pharos — the major reliquary, belonging to the Byzantine emperors. The complex of relics created a kind of icon of the Passions34. As known from the \'Book of Ceremonies\' by Constantine Porphyrogenitus, reliquaries of the True Cross used to be carried on battle fields during special imperial rituals35. A staurothek was carried in front of the 	HIEROTOPY :  p45.73
Cross used to be carried on battle fields during special imperial rituals35. A staurothek was carried in front of the emperor on the breast of an imperial chamber person. The link of a reliquary with the emperor personally was stressed by all means. It was not merely a demonstration of imperial omnipotence and the direct connection with the Ruler of universe, but a reference to the sacred space of the Pharos chapel, from where the relics were borrowed36. In such a ritual the whole army before the battle shared the most sacred space of the empire that was embodied in 	HIEROTOPY :  p45.94
a ritual the whole army before the battle shared the most sacred space of the empire that was embodied in the icon reliquary. If the hierotopical concept of the Limburg staurothek needs some additional evidence for its proper understanding, in some cases we should just look carefully at objects themselves. Thus, Byzantine reliquaries of St Demetrios reproduced not merely the iconography of the saint37, but the arrangement of his shrine in Thessaloniki, which is represented by sequence of flat and volume images, gradually appearing in the process of the opening of a reliquary. It aimed at the creation of an image 	HIEROTOPY :  p46.15
images, gradually appearing in the process of the opening of a reliquary. It aimed at the creation of an image of venerated sacred space, widely known because of the miracles that regularly happened there. A pendant reliquary invisibly connected its owner with the St Demetrios\' basilica in Thessaloniki . This sort of objects is not possible to interpret as just a relic decorated with images. They should be considered as spatial icons, which achieved their miraculous power through combination of the relic, the imagery, and its holy milieu. The number of examples can be easily extended, and the brief analysis 	HIEROTOPY :  p46.37
the relic, the imagery, and its holy milieu. The number of examples can be easily extended, and the brief analysis considerably developed. However, seems much more important to us here to evaluate a possibility of hierotopical approach to objects of minor arts, not to monumental spaces only. Intention to re create in small forms iconic concept of a particular sacred space reflects, in my opinion, a fundamental principle of the Eastern Christian visual culture. It seems correct in this context to pose a question of sacred spaces in literary texts38. In medieval writings, and particularly in hagiographic texts, there is quite 	HIEROTOPY :  p46.6
pose a question of sacred spaces in literary texts38. In medieval writings, and particularly in hagiographic texts, there is quite often a description of a sacred milieu — a dwelling place of the saint, partly created by himself. In some cases there is a chance to compare these descriptions with archaeological remains and characteristics of the natural environment39. All common positive features, i.e. distances, become invalid. A medieval author presents recognizable but iconic image of the space, which exists beyond our system of values. Such a hierotopical approach to the modelling of space by words images was recently named \'chorotope\' 	HIEROTOPY :  p46.82
our system of values. Such a hierotopical approach to the modelling of space by words images was recently named \'chorotope\' by Peter Brown, who had in mind the classical notion of the \'chronotope\' proposed by Mikhail Bakhtin40. It is not merely about any direct description of sacred spaces (the Paradise, a monastery or a church), but about an attempt to present by literary means an image of specific sacred milieu, which, looking from outside, could not have common \'sacred\' characteristics 41. In large spaces of the church and the city, in minor arts, and in literary texts there is one and 	HIEROTOPY :  p47.06
In large spaces of the church and the city, in minor arts, and in literary texts there is one and the same type of creativity, determined by the idea of spatial imagery and iconic perception of the world. In this brief introductory article I have just attempted to pose a problem. Naturally, not all the aspects have even been touched upon, a lot of them should be exposed and analysed properly. I did not deliberately make a strict distinction between \'hierotopy as a form of creativity\' and \'hierotopy as subject of cultural history\'. It seemed more important to me to 	HIEROTOPY :  p47.36
\'hierotopy as a form of creativity\' and \'hierotopy as subject of cultural history\'. It seemed more important to me to reveal the phenomenon in general, leaving for the future certain structural and terminological corrections of the subject and the method. As a conclusion, one might notice, that hierotopy is not a philosophical concept, which needs a sophisticated theory. It can be considered, in my view, as a form of vision that helps to recognize the presence of a special stratum of cultural phenomena, which should be historically reconstructed in detail. 	HIEROTOPY :  p47.66
of people who have survived death have captured the attention of mainstream audiences. Why do these ideas enjoy persistent and widespread success in contemporary Western culture? Adopting a cognitive approach to the study of afterlife accounts and drawing upon our own research, we argue that mainstream survival narratives are popular because they provide convincing evidence that one has journeyed to another realm. Such accounts are convincing, in part, because they meet default cognitive assumptions about what human survival would look like if it were possible. We support this claim by 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p0.01
meet default cognitive assumptions about what human survival would look like if it were possible. We support this claim by highlighting recurring common themes in recounted episodes of neardeath experiences and past life accounts and outlining how key findings in the cognitive science of religion, in conjunction with culturally situated accounts, can help scholars concerned with ideas about anomalous experiences to better understand their appeal. From around the mid twentieth century, Western media has capitalized increasingly on accounts of seemingly reputable cases of life after death. The general population is enamoured with tales of people who claim that they experienced rich 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p0.52
cases of life after death. The general population is enamoured with tales of people who claim that they experienced rich sensations and perceptions while either close to death or clinically dead1 death experiences,” hereafter referred to as NDEs, In these NDE narratives, people often describe feelings of detachment from one’s body (often accompanied by seeing one’s own body from above); meeting deceased friends, relatives, or other spirits; undergoing a life review or that of others); feelings of transcending time and space; and sensing that one has journeyed to another world or realm . Other narratives present personal accounts of reincarnation, 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p1.04
space; and sensing that one has journeyed to another world or realm . Other narratives present personal accounts of reincarnation, the idea that after biological death a person leaves his or her mortal body and returns to the human world in another form following rebirth . Often people recount their memories of having lived before These memories typically take the form of detailed recollections of traumatic life events, such as being separated from loved ones, drowning, or being burned alive. Such first person material is regular fodder for mainstream news outlets, including the New York Times , high profile television shows, 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p1.25
first person material is regular fodder for mainstream news outlets, including the New York Times , high profile television shows, such as the “Oprah Winfrey Show” and feature in a recent spate of bestselling books From a commercial perspective, these survival stories are a huge success. An entire business empire generating hundreds of millions of dollars rests on the persuasiveness of personal accounts of individuals claiming to have had such experiences. How can scholars explain the popularity of these survival accounts? To date, the standard response from social scientists concerned with anomalous experiences3 is to explain the transmissive success of ideas 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p1.46
To date, the standard response from social scientists concerned with anomalous experiences3 is to explain the transmissive success of ideas by locating them in a historically situated socio cultural context. For instance, particular ideas about past lives in contemporary America may well have a competitive advantage over other accounts because they are tailored to suit 1 Definitions of what constitutes death vary considerably; here, clinical death means cardiac arrest followed by cessation of measurable brain activity. See Younger, Arnold, and Schapiro for more details. 2 E.g., see Bowman 2012; Edelmann and Bernet 2007; Haraldsson 1997; Lyons 2013; Moye 2014; Stevenson 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p1.66
Schapiro for more details. 2 E.g., see Bowman 2012; Edelmann and Bernet 2007; Haraldsson 1997; Lyons 2013; Moye 2014; Stevenson 2001; Tucker 2013; Wallis 1999; Weiss and Weiss 2012. 3 There is debate amongst scholars over how to construe these phenomena For simplicity, we refer to them here as anomalous experiences. a quintessentially modern, eclectic brand of New Age spirituality and religious individualism that has become immensely popular in the West Albanese 2006; Bender 2007; Dawson 2006; Farias, Claridge, and Lalljee 2005; It is no accident that popular past life narratives often include ideas about the individual’s traumatic past life experiences 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p1.87
2005; It is no accident that popular past life narratives often include ideas about the individual’s traumatic past life experiences and provides guidance for the person to fulfill their potential in their current life. It may also be the case that, for example, remembering something from a previous existence is readily taken as evidence of reincarnation by those who have already become disenchanted with the conventional Judeo Christian canon. We contend that while cultural factors are necessary to explain the transmissive success of survival narratives, they are not sufficient. Consider the marked variation between NDE accounts. Variation in reports may well 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p2.07
success of survival narratives, they are not sufficient. Consider the marked variation between NDE accounts. Variation in reports may well be explained by cultural differences and modes of conceptualizing geophysical space. For instance, while experiences of journeys to another realm are found throughout the world, the means of transport vary: in North America, people often speak of traveling though a tunnel, whereas in Melanesia, people tend to report ascending ladders or walking along roads Likewise, the appearance or overall milieu of the afterlife realm can and does often vary significantly. But even among culturally— and individually—idiosyncratic NDEs, the basic structural 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p2.27
of the afterlife realm can and does often vary significantly. But even among culturally— and individually—idiosyncratic NDEs, the basic structural features of one’s spirit traveling to another realm and interacting with other deceased souls who dwell there are remarkably consistent.4 These similarities must also be explained. Furthermore, they align with basic assumptions about the afterlife that recur cross culturally: namely, that the essential identity or personality of an individual (i.e., “consciousness”) exists apart from the body, survives biological death, and travels to some other dimension inhabited by social others . It is likely that belief in an inhabited afterlife realm has 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p2.46
to some other dimension inhabited by social others . It is likely that belief in an inhabited afterlife realm has as much do with our species’ cognitive predispositions as it does fears of one’s own eventual demise, as people tend to view the death of a loved one as resulting in a change to their physical location rather than as an existential annihilation . A cognitive approach thus helps to explain why some survival narratives— including that we survive death, in what form this survival takes, and what constitutes evidence for this survival—enjoy widespread cultural success despite differences in propositional beliefs 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p2.66
what form this survival takes, and what constitutes evidence for this survival—enjoy widespread cultural success despite differences in propositional beliefs about life after death. In this paper, 4 Not all researchers agree on what features are universal within NDE accounts. For an overview of cross cultural comparisons, see Fox , Kellehear , Shushan , Corazza and Kuruppuarachchi . we outline how research in the cognitive science of religion (CSR)—including the results of our own primary research—can shed light on the popularity of two phenomena, near death experiences and past life beliefs, which, although seemingly different in terms of content, are 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p2.86
popularity of two phenomena, near death experiences and past life beliefs, which, although seemingly different in terms of content, are underpinned by similar assumptions about personal survival. In short, we propose that some survival narratives are popular because they are convincing, and they are convincing, in part, because they meet intuitive expectations about what human survival would look like if it were possible. Over the past twenty five years or so, cognitive science of religion has mounted evidence to suggest that recurrent features of religious and other types of extraordinary phenomena— like other aspects of popular culture—arise in large part through 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p3.06
recurrent features of religious and other types of extraordinary phenomena— like other aspects of popular culture—arise in large part through default intuitions about the natural world The rationale behind this empirical discipline is summarized by Boyer and Walker: An account of religious representations requires an explanation of their cognitive salience. If we focus on the recurrent patterns underlying the apparent diversity of religious representations, it appears that they are constrained by a small number of principles that are part and parcel of everyday cognition and are not specifically religious in nature. This approach is grounded in a selectionist framework, which 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p3.26
parcel of everyday cognition and are not specifically religious in nature. This approach is grounded in a selectionist framework, which proposes that to explain the spread of religious ideas, one must consider, in addition to sociohistorical factors, the role of human cognition in constraining and facilitating their transmission . Thus, cognitive science of religion complements a social learning interpretation by focusing on the common denominators of widespread ideas in survival narratives that, in conjunction with culturally specific ideas, lead to their rapid dissemination. Thus far cognitive science of religion has focused more on the assumptions underpinning postmortem survival to explain traditional 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p3.46
rapid dissemination. Thus far cognitive science of religion has focused more on the assumptions underpinning postmortem survival to explain traditional theological accounts of life after death, but the approach also has the potential to explain why some descriptions of personal survival in popular Western culture are especially compelling, even when they are divorced from mainstream theological doctrine. From this perspective, the core features of popular survival narratives showcase contemporary Western society’s assumptions about the afterlife, which are largely tractable to panhuman predispositions concerning the representation of persons, minds and bodies. The intuitive appeal of these stories is not limited to those 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p3.66
predispositions concerning the representation of persons, minds and bodies. The intuitive appeal of these stories is not limited to those who purport to believe in supernatural phenomena, and thus cannot be explained away as a product of propositional beliefs. For example, although commercial success reveals that past life narratives routinely attract considerable interest and media attention, only around 20 percent of Americans actually believe that reincarnation is possible, and even fewer believe that they themselves have lived before (see Haraldsson 2006; Walter 2001; White, Kelly, and In addition, ideas about reincarnation are often presented as having credence through corresponding parapsychological 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p3.87
2006; Walter 2001; White, Kelly, and In addition, ideas about reincarnation are often presented as having credence through corresponding parapsychological research5 about what constitutes “legitimate” evidence for life beyond death. For example, the late Ian Stevenson provided the most extensive treatment of past life research to date, documenting approximately 3,000 case reports of people from around the world who presumably possessed memories of their previous lives Stevenson 2001; for an overview of Stevenson, see Tucker 2007; see also Tucker From a cognitive perspective, ongoing research on reincarnation depends more upon parapsychologists’ implicit reasoning about how one would verify whether or not 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p4.08
cognitive perspective, ongoing research on reincarnation depends more upon parapsychologists’ implicit reasoning about how one would verify whether or not it exists than simply believing, ipso facto, that it does exist. These empirical practices for assessing the veridicality of afterlife claims tend to correlate with how ordinary people think about consciousness. In what follows, we outline three recurrent themes that appear throughout popular narratives about life after death and showcase how these standard inferences can often be understood within the materialist framework of CSR. I A Cognitive Account of Compelling Survival Narratives A Privileged Knowledge Among the vast array of NDE 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p4.3
framework of CSR. I A Cognitive Account of Compelling Survival Narratives A Privileged Knowledge Among the vast array of NDE reports, the most popular—and championed as the most persuasive—are those in which people allegedly acquire information during their death/near death state or previous life that they could not possibly have known before. These cases are often highlighted because the information contained within them is specific and (according to parapsychologists) later verified as accurate. Both forms of knowledge rely on memories of having lived—and often, having died—before. In the context of past life 5 Although mainstream academics have debated how best 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p4.53
of having lived—and often, having died—before. In the context of past life 5 Although mainstream academics have debated how best to construe the investigation of such phenomena (e.g., as psychical, occult, paranormal, supernatural, etc.), here we refer to research that seeks to determine the veracity of life after death as parapsychology (for an Most scholars regard parapsychology as a field that is not impartial and often fails to follow the rigorous standards of scientific enquiry, noting, for example, that their primary method of empirical investigation—case studies—is subject to confirmation bias narratives, these memories typically take the form of detailed recollections of 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p4.75
method of empirical investigation—case studies—is subject to confirmation bias narratives, these memories typically take the form of detailed recollections of traumatic life events, such as being separated from loved ones, drowning, or being burned alive. For instance, Stevenson reports the case of Ravi Shankar Gupta as evidence of reincarnation. He recalled eating guavas before being taken to the riverside where he was murdered. This description was consistent with the murder of a boy named Munna Prasad decades before, and so the memory was interpreted as support for the claim that Gupta was Prasad reborn Here, the phenomenon of reincarnation is given 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p4.97
memory was interpreted as support for the claim that Gupta was Prasad reborn Here, the phenomenon of reincarnation is given credence by certain empirical facts: the memory of a distinctive previous life event conforms to a factual record, one including details of which the person in question would not have any known access. Popular accounts of NDEs likewise contain the assumption of privileged knowledge. For example, after a patient was pronounced clinically dead, a nurse had removed his dentures and placed them on a nearby tray. Over a week later, the same recovering patient spotted the nurse and exclaimed that 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p5.16
placed them on a nearby tray. Over a week later, the same recovering patient spotted the nurse and exclaimed that she must know where the missing dentures were because he recalled being out of his body during intubation and having witnessed her removing them . For further illustration, consider the case of social worker Kimberly Clark Sharp , who reported an NDE case in which she visited a patient in a hospital who was recovering from a heart attack. The patient, named Maria, claimed that while she was being resuscitated she had found herself floating above the hospital, and remembered having 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p5.34
named Maria, claimed that while she was being resuscitated she had found herself floating above the hospital, and remembered having noticed a blue tennis shoe on the ledge of the building. Out of curiosity, Clark Sharp investigated and did, in fact, find a shoe precisely matching the one described by Maria and in the same spot where Maria reported seeing it. This particular example, notable for its specific imagery, is often presented as one of the strongest to suggest that memories of out of body perceptions occurring during NDEs coincide with objective reality, and as such this case is routinely presented 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p5.51
of out of body perceptions occurring during NDEs coincide with objective reality, and as such this case is routinely presented (and contested) in NDE related literature.6 In the context of NDEs, cases imply that perceptions occurring during the experience have a basis in objective reality and support the idea that consciousness occurs outside of the body and independently of the brain. In past life reports, they assume that a person can remember their past life and appeal to the audience as empiricists, who weigh up the likelihood of two people having the same experience. Both NDE and past life reports 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p5.69
as empiricists, who weigh up the likelihood of two people having the same experience. Both NDE and past life reports assume that the 6 This case is often repeated as strong evidence for the objective reality of NDE perceptions, even though Maria has never been located and there is no corroborating evidence beyond the report of Clark Sharp . person retains their identity across dramatic biological physical changes—including biological death and rebirth. B Psychological Immortality Underpinning case studies of life after death is the fundamental assumption that the ethereal mind continues apart from the physical body, an entity that may remain 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p5.87
death is the fundamental assumption that the ethereal mind continues apart from the physical body, an entity that may remain the same, change radically, or even be shed or otherwise discarded by the spirit at the moment of death. One study found that 58 percent of people reporting near death experiences felt as if they inhabited a new body at the time of the experience , although oftentimes people report lacking any kind of body during the experience. For instance, Allan Pring recounts that while he was undergoing a surgical procedure, he suddenly found himself in a “different place” where 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p6.05
Allan Pring recounts that while he was undergoing a surgical procedure, he suddenly found himself in a “different place” where he claimed, “I knew that I no longer had a physical existence. I was not conscious of having a body and the only senses that I was aware of were sight and sound, but even these were very different” . While conducting an ethnography of groups in Santa Barbara that provide support to those who claim to have had NDEs, Kinsella found most participants were convinced that NDEs provided solid evidence that, in the words of one interviewee, “we are spiritual 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p6.25
found most participants were convinced that NDEs provided solid evidence that, in the words of one interviewee, “we are spiritual beings having a temporary, embodied experience” Overall, the sum of NDE reports reflect the widespread assumption that, as developmental psychologist Paul Bloom states, “we do not feel as if we are our bodies; we feel as if we occupy them” . Bloom’s claim is situated in a growing body of research in the social cognitive sciences, which suggests that ideas about NDEs and past lives conform to intuitive assumptions about the constitution of identity for persons, often referred to as folk 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p6.45
NDEs and past lives conform to intuitive assumptions about the constitution of identity for persons, often referred to as folk dualism. Research indicates that humans are predisposed to represent persons as composed of multiple “substances”: material bodies and immaterial properties such as minds or “essences” On the one hand, other organisms in our environment are tracked fundamentally as physical, bodily objects; on the other hand, they are also represented as mindful, psychological beings, guided in their behavior by unobservable mental states (e.g., beliefs, desires, intentions). There is a general scholarly consensus that people everywhere represent themselves and others as being 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p6.65
states (e.g., beliefs, desires, intentions). There is a general scholarly consensus that people everywhere represent themselves and others as being constituted by non physical properties, hereafter “minds” for convenience The cognitive science of religion has mounted evidence to suggest that these intuitive tendencies concerning the representation of persons also explain some of the cross culturally recurrent features of supernatural agents, such as gods, ghosts, ancestors, and possessed spirits. Although we find many diverse examples of minds without bodies or minds inhabiting other bodies, one constant feature in popular portrayals of supernatural agents is that the individual agent has a mind and, 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p6.85
other bodies, one constant feature in popular portrayals of supernatural agents is that the individual agent has a mind and, therefore, intentionality 2008; Barrett 1999; Bering 2002; Bloom 2004; Boyer 2001; Cohen and Barrett Likewise, the same intuitions—that people’s minds are represented as retaining their personal identity—may explain why some accounts concerning the veracity of near death experiences and reincarnation are so widely accepted. Many NDE reports include meetings with deceased relatives who retain identifiable characteristics even though they may appear to be considerably different Such evidence of the continuation of personality after physical death is also routinely presented in other 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p7.05
to be considerably different Such evidence of the continuation of personality after physical death is also routinely presented in other kinds of phenomena addressed by parapsychology, such as mediumship, in which the spirits of loved ones presumably make contact with the living and do so while retaining their unique personality traits, adding to the plausibility that the medium has, in fact, successfully made contact with the deceased . Such accounts seem to betray a default cognitive operation behind popular survival narratives. They assume not only that memories are the most accurate test of personal continuity after death, but also that 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p7.26
narratives. They assume not only that memories are the most accurate test of personal continuity after death, but also that the capacity to remember—perhaps more than any other type of mental functioning— somehow survives biological cessation. This observation is in line with current findings in the cognitive science of religion, which indicate that from a young age, we find it easier to represent some biological needs and related psychological states as ceasing after death (e.g., the need to eat: feeling hungry) than non physically based states, such as remembering One potential cognitive mechanism proposed as being responsible for generating this selective 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p7.46
than non physically based states, such as remembering One potential cognitive mechanism proposed as being responsible for generating this selective bias in our innate representations of what the dead do and do not routinely experience has been referred to as a simulation constraint. In the context of thinking about what the afterlife is “like,” this refers to the inability to conceive of ourselves as “being” dead and unconscious, because we use mental states to simulate all experiences .7 To be clear, this does not mean that you cannot imagine what life would be like after you are dead (e.g., your funeral, 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p7.66
this does not mean that you cannot imagine what life would be like after you are dead (e.g., your funeral, your children’s birthdays, etc.), but such a construal requires a first person perceptive lens through which you envision 7 For other accounts of the cognitive mechanisms proposed, see Bloom and Roazzi, Nyhof, and Johnson . these future events. This imaginative obstacle means that it is easier to represent your dead self, and correspondingly, dead others, as continuing to exist mentally—just elsewhere, whether in a different body or a different realm (see One parapsychological example of this hurdle of consciously representing 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p7.86
elsewhere, whether in a different body or a different realm (see One parapsychological example of this hurdle of consciously representing non consciousness is the common “life review” aspect of NDEs, which involves the feeling of reliving (or witnessing) significant autobiographical events and reflecting meaningfully upon these deeply personal memories that have accumulated over a lifetime. One woman, speaking of her own NDE at age fifteen, states: Suddenly, wooosh I was going up through this tunnel … And then the next thing I knew, I was out in this gray misty place … And then this man came towards me—like a misty 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p8.06
I knew, I was out in this gray misty place … And then this man came towards me—like a misty light filled in outline—and he said, “Come with me and I’ll show you your life.” The thing I most remember having pointed out to me was when I was throwing stones at my brothers and sister. I was about 9 or 10, and I was really angry and frustrated … and they were really upset. [Seeing this] I was ashamed, and then he took me away from that. Sutherland 1995: 148 Memories of having lived before serve as lay verification 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p8.27
and then he took me away from that. Sutherland 1995: 148 Memories of having lived before serve as lay verification cues for people around the world, often under very different circumstances. In places where every ancestor is thought to return to the human world, such as some cultures in West Africa, South Asia, and northwestern North America, newborn children are often examined for distinguishing mental recollections that correspond to characteristics of the deceased Ideas about the continuity of memory in reincarnation are also apparent in elaborate rituals in efforts to determine which Lamas have been reborn and who manifests these revered 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p8.47
are also apparent in elaborate rituals in efforts to determine which Lamas have been reborn and who manifests these revered souls presently The most well known example of such a tradition is the search for the Dalai Lama in Tibetan Buddhism, a formalized ritual that depends crucially upon a candidate child’s ability to distinguish amongst various objects those which belonged to the deceased Dalai Lama, thus inferring that the child remembers the object from his previous life and is the Dalai Lama reincarnated . Furthermore, recent research has shown that intuitions about memory serve as robust evidence of reincarnation for many 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p8.67
Lama reincarnated . Furthermore, recent research has shown that intuitions about memory serve as robust evidence of reincarnation for many practitioners of New Age spirituality. White, Kelly and Nichols found that New Age spiritual seekers in the U.S. regard the memory of a specific past life event as constituting stronger evidence that the person has lived before than any other potential cue, such as an inexplicable behavior, physical marks or factual information. These intuitions about the centrality of memory in establishing reincarnation are not simply a product of being enculturated in such a belief system. White (2015a; conducted a series 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p8.87
establishing reincarnation are not simply a product of being enculturated in such a belief system. White (2015a; conducted a series of studies with Jains in Southern India, who believe in reincarnation, and Americans who endorse stereotypical Judeo Christian views of life after death. Despite major differences in their explicitly stated beliefs, when presented with a suite of memory based cues, both sets of naive participants reasoned similarly upon being given a hypothetical reincarnation challenge for “matching” fictional living people with their deceased counterparts. Specifically, individuals intuitively privileged a shared episodic memory (memory of a specific biographical event) as evidence for reincarnation 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p9.07
deceased counterparts. Specifically, individuals intuitively privileged a shared episodic memory (memory of a specific biographical event) as evidence for reincarnation over various combinations of other types of memory (e.g., procedural) and physical features (e.g., physique). Being in a hypothetical conscious state without memories appears especially difficult to imagine. Indeed, research suggests that people regard memories, and certain kinds of memories in particular, as more likely to remain constant over physical transformations than any other psychological attributes. For example, in a series of experiments by Blok, Newman, and Rips , participants reasoned that personal identity remains intact Jim”) so long as the 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p9.26
of experiments by Blok, Newman, and Rips , participants reasoned that personal identity remains intact Jim”) so long as the target’s (Jim’s) memories are preserved. This memory identity effect panned out even when the individual was described as undergoing dramatic physical changes: from person to robot, robot to microchip, and then microchip inserted into a new robot. Furthermore, when it comes to reasoning about the perpetuity of the self, people tend to give special credence to episodic (or autobiographical) memories, such as remembering having had dinner the previous night . In contrast to semantic memory, which involves general, factual knowledge 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p9.45
such as remembering having had dinner the previous night . In contrast to semantic memory, which involves general, factual knowledge that cannot be easily countenanced in terms of its acquisition, episodic memory involves autobiographical events that one can recall having personally experienced at a certain place and time Similar to aspects of the self that be derived from our own predictable behaviors (e.g., “I’m usually stubborn”), episodic memories also give shape to one’s core concept of the self. They feature a self referential quality of retrieval (i.e., a sense of “mineness”), or the ability to mentally re experience the event from 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p9.64
self referential quality of retrieval (i.e., a sense of “mineness”), or the ability to mentally re experience the event from a first person perspective. This gives the individual a continued sense of ownership over the memory. Together, these qualities lend themselves to a sort of intuitive model, or default stance, of psychological continuity after death . For example, if one recalls the experience of having died and seeing the surgeons below attempting to resuscitate her physical body, that individual is likely to be convinced that it was indeed herself floating above the operating table, not someone else. Thus, for some people, 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p9.83
to be convinced that it was indeed herself floating above the operating table, not someone else. Thus, for some people, such convincing episodic memories of having lived before or surviving death are the most powerful epistemological evidence of an afterlife, trumping materialist conjectures about the role of the brain in consciousness. If someone recalls having a memory of a personal event, he or she is likely to assume that they were, in fact, “present” at the time of encoding extant memory is the product of the self’s first hand experiences at that point in time). The “seeing is believing” heuristic 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p10.02
memory is the product of the self’s first hand experiences at that point in time). The “seeing is believing” heuristic is hard to override when thinking about the self after death. C Physical Embodiment Parapsychological accounts of life after death reflect the implicit assumption that the same mind can inhabit different bodies (such as a physical and nonphysical one) at different periods of time, or even multiple bodies over a long, continuous period of time. This observation aligns with a major set of findings in the cognitive sciences showing that we perceive others as having an immutable personal identity that exists 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p10.2
set of findings in the cognitive sciences showing that we perceive others as having an immutable personal identity that exists independently of their physical appearance. For example, young children judge a caterpillar that has become a butterfly, or a dog that has changed breed, as “the same individual” so long as their preferences are the same Yet these ideas are also constrained by our everyday social experiences. As previously noted, there are NDE accounts whereby people are met by deceased relatives, all of whom are identifiable even though they may appear quite different than what the experiencer remembers (they just know 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p10.39
all of whom are identifiable even though they may appear quite different than what the experiencer remembers (they just know it’s that person). Presumably, what makes these decedents “recognizable” is that the person’s mind is essentially the same as it was in life. Although the afterlife is typically described as being populated by ethereal spirits (i.e., people without bodies), however, those who have had NDEs often betray their implicit representation of these souls as still possessing a bounded corporeal existence. These departed souls may be packaged in invisible bodies, but they would seem to be embodied nonetheless. Folk depictions of 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p10.58
These departed souls may be packaged in invisible bodies, but they would seem to be embodied nonetheless. Folk depictions of the dead endow them with literal, if altered, body forms. In addition, to exert pressure on objects in the natural environment so that their presence is detectable in the form of a communicative “sign,” as is the case in many parapsychological accounts, souls must occupy physical space and possess attributes (e.g., mass) enabling them to affect other physical forms . While the concept of reincarnation endorsed in popular survival narratives includes the assumption that the person can be reborn into another, 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p10.77
the concept of reincarnation endorsed in popular survival narratives includes the assumption that the person can be reborn into another, completely different, body, when physical similarities are present between the deceased and the living, this is seen as constituting strong evidence for the phenomenon . Most often, but not exclusively, these marks correspond with wounds that would have been inflicted at the time of death in a previous life. Congenital abnormalities such as missing fingers, rare birthmarks, and skin irregularities such as discoloration, lesions, spots, or moles are said to betray the cause of death or other misfortunes from the 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p10.95
such as discoloration, lesions, spots, or moles are said to betray the cause of death or other misfortunes from the individual’s previous life. For example, Stevenson reports the case of a child who was born with a pale, scar like tissue approximately three centimeters wide and extending around her entire skull. In conjunction with this unusual physical defect, the girl claimed to recall the life of a man who had had major skull surgery shortly before his death. Stevenson viewed such cases of combined past life memories and physical markings as the best objective evidence of reincarnation. In fact, he devoted 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p11.13
cases of combined past life memories and physical markings as the best objective evidence of reincarnation. In fact, he devoted a major tome to these so called “reincarnation and biology” subtypes in which he meticulously documented over 200 such cases . Just like comparing the details of personal recollections to historical events, physical marks that correspond to those on the deceased (sometimes observable in autopsy photographs) are also taken as verification that some essential aspect of the individual (i.e., the “soul”) has returned to the human world through literal rebirth. Thus, when a person is reborn they are represented as possessing 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p11.31
has returned to the human world through literal rebirth. Thus, when a person is reborn they are represented as possessing a bounded corporeal existence that shares some form of continuity with the person before death, and thus provides a convenient (and reliable) means of evidence that they are one and the same person. The appeal of using physical similarities as key indicators of a past life can be partly understood in light of inherent cognitive biases concerning our folk knowledge of persons. Such features are convenient, unique, and easy to detect. In the natural world, too, we ascribe continued personal 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p11.48
of persons. Such features are convenient, unique, and easy to detect. In the natural world, too, we ascribe continued personal identity to individuals based on stable physical traits when appearance or personality is otherwise radically altered such as Alzheimer’s disease or amnesia, traumatic bodily injury, or as the result of dramatic aging over long periods of time Likewise, by comparing physical marks between the living and dead to ascertain the likelihood of reincarnation, whereby some essential and immortal aspect of the individual is envisioned as remaining the same from one life to the next, parapsychologists are employing the same default empirical 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p11.65
individual is envisioned as remaining the same from one life to the next, parapsychologists are employing the same default empirical devices as those used in the everyday social world. Similarly, Cohen found that members of an Afro Brazilian spirit possession cult tended to attribute blame to the possessed (i.e., living) person, rather than to the possessing spirit. For example, if a person were drunk at a street party and behaved in socially unacceptable ways, even though onlookers said the person was possessed by a spirit who had displaced the individual’s mind, they still showed contempt towards the inebriate, and that person 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p11.83
possessed by a spirit who had displaced the individual’s mind, they still showed contempt towards the inebriate, and that person would often be sanctioned accordingly . Thus, people seem to find it difficult to disentangle physical appearance and personal identity and harbor an intuitive association between these categories. Again, in accepting a person’s claim to have lived before, parapsychologists are likely to revert to the standard cognitive heuristics that they deploy in everyday contexts, even though reincarnation entails, in principle, a transference of the soul to another form. Together, these observations suggest that one reason popular reports of NDEs and 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p12.01
a transference of the soul to another form. Together, these observations suggest that one reason popular reports of NDEs and reincarnation are compelling is because they meet cognitively intuitive expectations about what counts as evidence for life after death. Their wide appeal suggests that they are not simply by products of enculturation or indoctrination into a particular theology. Our position is that existing findings in the cognitive sciences, along with targeted additional research questions, can help scholars to pinpoint which psychological pressures drive the continuation of these popular ideas even in the face of widespread scepticism and a materialist scientific worldview. 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p12.21
pressures drive the continuation of these popular ideas even in the face of widespread scepticism and a materialist scientific worldview. II Conclusion To explain why survival narratives have become popular in the modern west we thus need to take account of human cognition. This cognitive approach does not supplant or exclude explanations which look towards socio cultural particulars that may give rise to them, but rather, complements them. It is rather obvious that to provide a compelling account of particular forms of life after death in a specific culture at a point in time, it is necessary to be concerned with 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p12.42
of life after death in a specific culture at a point in time, it is necessary to be concerned with broader socio cultural factors. For instance, in addition to providing people with a conceptual framework for their inability to cognitively simulate psychological non existence , past life reasoning also satisfies present emotional needs, accounting for challenges by appealing to some previously lived and unresolved traumatic event 2006; Meyersburg and McNally 2010; Partridge 2006; Spanos, et al., 1991; Just as explanatory accounts of the popularity of life after death accounts must take heed of the socio cultural contexts within which narratives 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p12.63
accounts of the popularity of life after death accounts must take heed of the socio cultural contexts within which narratives are embedded, likewise, explanations of dominant cultural accounts must also recognize the importance of panhuman cognitive processes in shaping their success. We must look not only at mechanisms of indoctrination and simplistic notions of existential anxiety, but also at how such ideas articulate with an underlying cognitive system that works in predictable ways. Such ideas tap basic human cognitive processes, including simulation constraints imposed by consciously representing death as non consciousness. Parapsychology, while ostensibly empirically motivated, may serve similar purposes as 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p12.83
simulation constraints imposed by consciously representing death as non consciousness. Parapsychology, while ostensibly empirically motivated, may serve similar purposes as religion in this natural, complementary sense. This is especially true for cognitive scientists of religion, since cognitive science of religion offers a clear conceptual perspective from which to understand the seemingly impenetrable appeal of parapsychology. Belief in parapsychological phenomena (and yet who may not classify themselves as religious or even spiritual) may even be a better—and untapped—resource for ascertaining the role of cognitive mechanisms in this domain of human reasoning. 	How to Know You’ve Survived Death:  p13.14
unsubstantiated belief Abstract Objective: There are several existing questionnaires measuring paranormal or scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs but none give comprehensive cover of a broad spectrum of beliefs while also being up to date. There is also a debate about the number of separate types of belief. Thereby, reported here is the development and validation of a new multidimensional questionnaire measure of scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs in the general UK population. Method & Results. In Study 1, participants completed a questionnaire containing a pool of 82 items covering nine facets of belief discernible 	Multi:  p2
Results. In Study 1, participants completed a questionnaire containing a pool of 82 items covering nine facets of belief discernible conceptually within the existing research literature. Scree analysis followed by exploratory factor analysis indicated the existence of four empirically observable factors: belief in supernatural forces; belief in God and destiny; belief in alien visitation, monsters and conspiracies; and belief in consciousness beyond the body. Twenty four items were selected as measures of these factors. Studies 2, 3 and 4 demonstrated the convergent and divergent validity of the four empirically derived questionnaire subscales and their internal reliability. Conclusion. The resultant new Multi 	Multi:  p2.35
convergent and divergent validity of the four empirically derived questionnaire subscales and their internal reliability. Conclusion. The resultant new Multi dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs (MQSUB) is a psychometrically robust measure and comprises a comprehensive framework which can be used to systematically investigate the psychological and social concomitants of such beliefs. Introduction Belief in scientifically unsubstantiated phenomena is widespread throughout the world. For example, Moore observed that around three quarters of the adult American population accept at least one paranormal belief (for example, ghosts, telepathy, precognition, astrology) while Austin reported that 68% of adult British society reported having experienced some 	Multi:  p2.75
belief (for example, ghosts, telepathy, precognition, astrology) while Austin reported that 68% of adult British society reported having experienced some kind of supernatural event, including 31% claiming to have experienced the presence of a ghost. Brotherton, French & Pickering reported moderate levels of conspiracist ideation in their series of studies. Despite the prevalence of belief in scientifically unsubstantiated phenomena there is currently no comprehensive and up to date measure available for researchers. The studies reported here document the development and validation of a comprehensive and multi dimensional measure of scientifically unsubstantiated belief to assist research examining the causes and consequences 	Multi:  p3.1
validation of a comprehensive and multi dimensional measure of scientifically unsubstantiated belief to assist research examining the causes and consequences of such belief. The term paranormal is defined as \'a proposition that has not been empirically attested to the standards of the scientific establishment but is generated within the non scientific community and extensively endorsed by people who might normally be expected by their society to be capable of rational thought and reality testing\' . This definition emphasises the lack of empirical evidence for a belief and so might include those in conspiracy theories and religious belief, though these are not 	Multi:  p3.39
empirical evidence for a belief and so might include those in conspiracy theories and religious belief, though these are not typically regarded as facets of the paranormal. The present series of studies uses the term `scientifically unsubstantiated phenomena\' as a generic one to encompass a wider field than is commonly understood by the word `paranormal\'. Belief in scientifically unsubstantiated phenomena may seem harmless but can have damaging impacts on personal outcomes and on wider society. For example, a tendency to conspiracist thinking is associated with non compliance with health care for HIV/AIDS , and a withdrawal from cooperation with security measures 	Multi:  p3.67
thinking is associated with non compliance with health care for HIV/AIDS , and a withdrawal from cooperation with security measures . Belief in alternative medicine can lead to inappropriate health behaviours , while belief in demonic possession can result in violence against individuals perceived to be afflicted ( http://www.livescience.com/37274 toddler exorcism death.html ). Generally, belief in scientifically unsubstantiated phenomena discourages appreciation of evidence, thereby harming an individual’s ability to assess current threats and concerns, or to evaluate the importance of initiatives such as testing for cancer in at risk groups . This may be of concern in politicians who take 	Multi:  p3.96
initiatives such as testing for cancer in at risk groups . This may be of concern in politicians who take decisions with far reaching consequences, such as whether to fund renewable energy sources or homeopathy delivered through a national health service. There are several questionnaire measures of paranormal belief, the two most used being the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale (RPBS) originally developed by Tobacyk , and the Australian Sheep and Goat Scale (ASGS) of Thalbourne & Delin . Both of these have substantial limitations. The Revised Paranormal Belief Scale is the most frequently used measure of paranormal belief according to Irwin 	Multi:  p4.25
have substantial limitations. The Revised Paranormal Belief Scale is the most frequently used measure of paranormal belief according to Irwin . It purports to measure belief in seven facets of the paranormal: traditional religious belief, psi, witchcraft, superstition, spiritualism, extraordinary life forms, and precognition. This measure has been valuable in establishing the multi dimensionality of paranormal belief and has produced a substantial body of research. A major drawback is that its 26 items are insufficient to measure the seven facets reliably, since there have been frequent failures to replicate the factor structure: some researchers consider there are five factors , while 	Multi:  p4.55
since there have been frequent failures to replicate the factor structure: some researchers consider there are five factors , while Lange, Irwin, and Houran preferred two clusters of items which they termed New Age Philosophy (psi and psychic powers, future prediction, astral projection) and Traditional Paranormal Belief (witchcraft and the devil). Some items are outdated, for example, the statement `witches do exist\' could be argued to be true since people who follow the practice of Wicca call themselves witches. The item `There is life on other planets\' is now scientifically supported and accepted as the case. The items in the 	Multi:  p4.84
item `There is life on other planets\' is now scientifically supported and accepted as the case. The items in the traditional religious belief scale are Judeo Christian in nature and do not address the full spectrum of traditional religious beliefs commonplace in many countries today. The Australian Sheep-Goat Scale is so named to refer to those who believe in the paranormal as `sheep\' and those who are sceptical as `goats\'. The Australian Sheep-Goat Scale contains eighteen items measuring belief and self rated abilities in, telepathy, psychokinesis (movement of objects by the power of the mind), precognition, and post mortem survival. Its 	Multi:  p5.12
rated abilities in, telepathy, psychokinesis (movement of objects by the power of the mind), precognition, and post mortem survival. Its scope, however, does not cover the full range of popular paranormal belief. Other measures are focused on a narrow range of belief: for example, the Generic Conspiracist Belief Scale measures general conspiracist ideation, the tendency to endorse conspiracy theories across a range of domains. Its scope is thus limited to one specific facet of scientifically unsubstantiated belief. None of these existing measures cover the whole range of common beliefs in scientifically unsubstantiated phenomena. The present study aimed to identity the conceptually 	Multi:  p5.4
measures cover the whole range of common beliefs in scientifically unsubstantiated phenomena. The present study aimed to identity the conceptually and empirically discriminable components of scientifically unsubstantiated belief and to create a multi dimensional questionnaire measuring belief across a wide range of topics of current concern and using items that are well understood by the general population. In Study 1, participants were presented with 82 questions covering a wide range of beliefs including the seven facets of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale and additionally belief in conspiracy theories, religion, destiny / fate / karma, and alternative medicine. Subsequent studies reported 	Multi:  p5.67
Belief Scale and additionally belief in conspiracy theories, religion, destiny / fate / karma, and alternative medicine. Subsequent studies reported here investigated the convergent and divergent validity of the relevant subscales of the new questionnaire compared to existing measures. Convergent validity was measured relative to the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale , the Generic Conspiracist Belief Scale , and the Australian Sheep Goat Scale . Divergent validity was measured by comparison with the Creative Experiences Questionnaire measure of fantasy proneness , the Rational Experiential Inventory measure of thinking styles , and locus of control . In addition, Study 4 examined how mortality 	Multi:  p5.94
Rational Experiential Inventory measure of thinking styles , and locus of control . In addition, Study 4 examined how mortality awareness, rebelliousness, and self perceived marginalisation, relate to scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs. Study 1 Participants There were 393 participants recruited via social media. An opportunity sampling method was employed wherein the researchers used their electronic networks to elicit the input of respondents. Undergraduate students were approached via email, as well as individuals in social networks on Facebook and Instagram. 85 to age 18 (`Advanced\' secondary school level), and 234 had university or professional qualifications. There were 122 students (only 4 of whom 	Multi:  p6.34
18 (`Advanced\' secondary school level), and 234 had university or professional qualifications. There were 122 students (only 4 of whom self designated as part time), 20 were unemployed, 11 self designated as home makers, 210 were employed (153 full time, 57 part time), and 30 described themselves as retired. Household income was less than £5,000 per year for 109 of the participants, over £45,000 for 30 of the participants, with the majority reporting between £11,000 and £30,000. A majority of respondents gave their ethnicity as `white European\', with the remainder spread among other ethnicities . Religious affiliation was varied: 175 	Multi:  p6.77
respondents gave their ethnicity as `white European\', with the remainder spread among other ethnicities . Religious affiliation was varied: 175 specified having no religion, 136 self designated as Christian, 37 were Muslim, and 6 were Buddhist, while 35 gave their religion as `other\'. Thus, the participant sample covered a broad range of demographics. It should be noted that previous research has shown only weak and inconsistent variation in belief according to these factors . Measures The initial pool of 82 items was created following an examination of existing questionnaire measures of paranormal and conspiracist belief and the a priori consideration of 	Multi:  p7.14
was created following an examination of existing questionnaire measures of paranormal and conspiracist belief and the a priori consideration of other areas of belief, specifically belief in the influence of destiny / fate / karma and belief in the efficacy of alternative medicine. We took a deliberately inclusive approach in order to produce a wide ranging measure, and this included items measuring religious belief. Nine conceptual domains of belief were identified: anomalous mental powers including clairvoyance, telepathy, precognition, and psychokinesis, an example of an item being `some people can see events before they happen\'; traditional supernatural belief including good and bad 	Multi:  p7.44
example of an item being `some people can see events before they happen\'; traditional supernatural belief including good and bad luck, dowsing, and casting spells, an exemplar item being `touching wood can bring good luck\'; fate / destiny / karma, e.g., `some events are fated to occur\'; extraordinary life forms including aliens, the Loch Ness monster, and Bigfoot, e.g., `Aliens from other planets have visited Earth\'; the survival hypothesis including reincarnation, ghosts, and astral travel, e.g., `Some part of a person’s consciousness can survive their death\'; future prediction, e.g., `Study of the stars can be used to predict the future for 	Multi:  p7.74
consciousness can survive their death\'; future prediction, e.g., `Study of the stars can be used to predict the future for individuals\'; Energy based therapies, e.g., \'homeopathy is an effective form of medicine\'; religious beliefs, e.g. \'The world was created by a God\'; and conspiracist beliefs, e.g., \'National governments routinely lie to the general public in order to retain power\'. For each of these nine conceptual domains of belief items were generated so that collectively the item pool comprised of 82 in all. The 82 items were scored on a scale of 1 5, where 1 = strongly disagree, 2 = 	Multi:  p8.04
in all. The 82 items were scored on a scale of 1 5, where 1 = strongly disagree, 2 = disagree, 3 = neither agree nor disagree, 4 = agree, and 5 = strongly agree. Results & Discussion All 82 items were entered into an initial principal components analysis in which each item is treated as if it were a factor with an associated eigen value. These eigen values were then graphically illustrated in the form of a scree plot, as after Cattell . Visual analysis of this scree plot indicates four `jumps\' down to the scree line, which, from previous 	Multi:  p8.33
after Cattell . Visual analysis of this scree plot indicates four `jumps\' down to the scree line, which, from previous data sets in which the number of underlying dimensions is known, indicates the number of principal components which can be extracted. Therefore, a further principal components analysis was conducted in which the number of factors to be extracted was specified as four. Varimax rotation was also specified to maximise the amount of unique variance accounted for by each factor. The resulting four factors collectively accounted for 48% of the variance in the item correlation matrix. Loadings of each item onto the 	Multi:  p8.62
four factors collectively accounted for 48% of the variance in the item correlation matrix. Loadings of each item onto the factors are displayed in Table 1. The factor analysis showed only 11 items of 82 that loaded above 0.4 onto two factors, and no items that loaded above 0.4 onto more than two factors. This fails to offer evidence for a general factor. INSERT TABLE 1 HERE the lead item being `hanging a mirror in a special place can bring good fortune to a house\' ; belief in the influence of God and destiny (BIGD), the lead item being `God 	Multi:  p8.91
good fortune to a house\' ; belief in the influence of God and destiny (BIGD), the lead item being `God has created rules for correct moral behaviour\' ; belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies (BAMC) the lead item being `There is no physical evidence on earth of alien visitors from other planets\' (reverse scored) ; and, belief in consciousness beyond the body (BCB), the lead item being `Individual existence ends with death\' (reverse scored) . Collectively these four empirically derived subscales constitute the twenty four item Multidimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs (MQSUB). Given the four factor structure of the Multi-dimensional 	Multi:  p9.37
constitute the twenty four item Multidimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs (MQSUB). Given the four factor structure of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs has been derived from principal components analysis wherein the ratio of participants to items is 4.79:1 , this structure is likely to be stable and replicable. Further, the four factor structure of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs bears some resemblance to the two cluster solution of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale found by Lange, Irwin, and Houran, . Their first cluster, new age philosophy, consisted of psi, future prediction, astrology, and astral travel, and 	Multi:  p9.92
Irwin, and Houran, . Their first cluster, new age philosophy, consisted of psi, future prediction, astrology, and astral travel, and so resembles the belief in supernatural forces scale, which includes items measuring belief in future prediction, spiritualism, and Psi (e.g., telepathy). Their second cluster, traditional paranormal beliefs (witchcraft and the devil), resembles belief in the influence of God and destiny which include items measuring traditional religious belief. Differences are likely to be due to the small number of items in the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale wherein it is not possible to discover some clusters of beliefs given no items addressed 	Multi:  p10.18
the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale wherein it is not possible to discover some clusters of beliefs given no items addressed all of the relevant areas of belief. For example, Lange et al could not have discovered a cluster resembling the belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies since there were no items accessing conspiracist beliefs in the RPBS. Lange et al did not find a distinct cluster of items relating to belief in consciousness existing beyond the body. This may be because the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale did not examine this belief directly; the items in the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale spirituality 	Multi:  p10.38
the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale did not examine this belief directly; the items in the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale spirituality facet relate to astral travel, reincarnation, and communication with the dead, which may imply, but do not specifically state, the possibility of consciousness existing outside the body. The belief in consciousness beyond the body factor appears more focused than the other factors, but this is what the results indicated so this would appear to be a genuine factor derived from a large sample. . The Australian Sheep Goat Scale maps conceptually onto both the belief in supernatural forces and belief in 	Multi:  p10.59
large sample. . The Australian Sheep Goat Scale maps conceptually onto both the belief in supernatural forces and belief in consciousness beyond the body scales, though the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale has only a single scale. This is possibly because the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale contains only two items pertinent to the belief in consciousness beyond the body (addressing life after death) and this may be too narrow in scope to be apparent as a distinct factor. Study 2 The aim of Study 2 was to investigate the convergent and discriminant validity of the new MQSUB. Convergent validity would be supported by 	Multi:  p10.8
Study 2 was to investigate the convergent and discriminant validity of the new MQSUB. Convergent validity would be supported by the observation of substantive correlations between the subscales of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs and existing questionnaires with equivalent or overlapping conceptual content, while divergent validity would be supported by the observation of smaller correlations elsewhere. The following correlations were predicted on the basis of conceptual overlap and similarity of content between the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs and other measures: belief in supernatural forces (BSF) should correlate substantively with almost all facets of the RPBS, since the 	Multi:  p11.01
and other measures: belief in supernatural forces (BSF) should correlate substantively with almost all facets of the RPBS, since the facets all suppose the existence of forces beyond the natural world; the exception is Traditional Religious belief, which is often characterised somewhat differently to other forms of scientifically unsubstantiated belief; belief in the influence of God and destiny (BIGD) should correlate substantively with the Traditional Religion facet of the RPBS; belief in the influence of God and destiny should also correlate strongly with the Precognition facet, which presupposes the existence of a force, conceptually similar to destiny, controlling future events; belief 	Multi:  p11.33
strongly with the Precognition facet, which presupposes the existence of a force, conceptually similar to destiny, controlling future events; belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies (BAMC) should correlate substantively with the Extraordinary Life Forms facet of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale and with the GCBS since these purpose to measure the same concepts; and, belief in consciousness beyond the body (BCB) should correlate substantively with the Traditional Religion and Spiritualism facets of the RPBS, which depend on some form of soul, or mind that is not tied to the body. Several other predictions for moderately sized correlations were based on 	Multi:  p11.65
soul, or mind that is not tied to the body. Several other predictions for moderately sized correlations were based on previous studies. Correlations among the facets of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale suggest that small to moderate correlations should be expected among all of the scales of the MQSUB. The observation by Darwin, Neave & Holmes of moderate correlations between conspiracy beliefs and the Psi, Witchcraft, Spiritualism and Precognition facets of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale suggests that belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies should correlate moderately with these facets of the RPBS. The CEQ should be moderately correlated with all 	Multi:  p11.96
monsters and conspiracies should correlate moderately with these facets of the RPBS. The CEQ should be moderately correlated with all the subscales of the MQSUB, following observations of correlations between fantasy proneness and paranormal belief and experience . Finally, the relationship of Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs scores to demographic variables and individual traits should resemble the relationships of conceptually similar scales in previous studies . Method Participants There were 123 participants, a subset of those recruited to study 1. There were 73 women, 49 men, and one individual who gave their gender as androgyne. Their ages ranged from 18 	Multi:  p12.26
There were 73 women, 49 men, and one individual who gave their gender as androgyne. Their ages ranged from 18 to 86, mean age = 41.9 years, SD = 14.9. Of these, 56 were married, 10 were cohabiting, 43 were single, 10 were divorced, 2 were widowed and 2 were separated. Educationally, 19 were educated to age 16, 28 to age 18, and 76 had university or professional qualifications. There were 15 full time students, 12 unemployed, 6 home makers, 69 employed, and 21 retired. Household income was less than £5,000 per year for 25 of the participants, over £45,000 	Multi:  p12.56
69 employed, and 21 retired. Household income was less than £5,000 per year for 25 of the participants, over £45,000 for 16 of the participants, and the majority were between £11,000 and £25,000. Nearly all gave their ethnicity as white European with the rest spread among other ethnicities. Religious affiliation was varied: 48 had no religion, 50 were Christian, 4 were Buddhist, and 21 gave their religion as `other\'. Design Participants completed a series of questionnaires online: the new Multi Dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs; the RPBS; the GCBS; the Creative Experiences Questionnaire ; and the demographic questions. Measures Traditional 	Multi:  p12.85
Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs; the RPBS; the GCBS; the Creative Experiences Questionnaire ; and the demographic questions. Measures Traditional Religious Belief (`there is a devil\'); Psi (`some individuals are able to levitate (lift) objects through mental forces\'); Witchcraft (`black magic really exists\'); Superstition (`black cats can bring bad luck\'); Spiritualism (`your mind or soul can leave your body and travel\' i.e. astral projection); Extraordinary Life Forms (`the Loch Ness monster of Scotland exists\'); and, Precognition (`astrology is a way to accurately predict the future\'). Participants report their agreement with each item on a 7 to 7(strongly agree). The test retest 	Multi:  p13.17
accurately predict the future\'). Participants report their agreement with each item on a 7 to 7(strongly agree). The test retest reliability of the facets of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale ranged from 0.71 to 0.95 over a four week period . The GCBS is designed to measure the extent to which an individual believes that the public is not told the truth about important issues. It includes 15 questions in a single scale, for example `the government is involved in the murder of innocent citizens and/or well known public figures, and keeps this a secret` and `the spread of certain viruses 	Multi:  p13.5
murder of innocent citizens and/or well known public figures, and keeps this a secret` and `the spread of certain viruses and/or diseases is the result of the deliberate, concealed efforts of some organisation\'. The internal reliability of the GCBS was very high at 0.93 and the five week test retest reliability was also high at 0.89 . The Creative Experiences Questionnaire contains 25 items measuring fantasy proneness, example items being `as a child I had my own make believe friend or animal` and `many of my fantasies have a realistic intensity\'. Test retest reliability over six weeks was reported as 	Multi:  p13.84
or animal` and `many of my fantasies have a realistic intensity\'. Test retest reliability over six weeks was reported as 0.95 and internal consistency was satisfactory with Cronbach’s alpha = 0.72 . Procedure Participants were recruited via social media and completed the set of questionnaires online. The only inclusion criteria were that the participant should be over 18 years old with a good command of written English. The following questionnaires were completed, always in this sequence: the new Multi Dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs, the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale, the Generic Conspiracist Belief Scale, the Creative Experiences Questionnaire, and the 	Multi:  p14.15
of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs, the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale, the Generic Conspiracist Belief Scale, the Creative Experiences Questionnaire, and the demographic questions. The set of questionnaires took around thirty minutes to complete and participants were able to pause the questionnaires and return within seven days. After completion, participants were given debriefing information and invited to contact the researcher if they had any further questions about the study. Results and Discussion There were no missing data. There were no cases where a participant had selected the same response option for all (or nearly all) items, and so all were included in the 	Multi:  p14.46
participant had selected the same response option for all (or nearly all) items, and so all were included in the analysis. Total scores for each of the four subscales of the new Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs were calculated as the mean of the items on each subscale, with some item scores reversed as indicated in Study 1. Internal reliability of the subscales was good: Cronbach’s alpha = 0.91 for BSF, 0.74 for BIGD, 0.81 for BAMC, and 0.91 for BCB. The score on each facet of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale was calculated as the sum of the 	Multi:  p14.77
for BCB. The score on each facet of the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale was calculated as the sum of the items on the facet, with items reverse scored as necessary. The total score was calculated for the CEQ and the GCBS as the sum of all items. Bivariate correlations among the variables are shown in Table 2.1. Each scale of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs correlated more strongly with those measures with which it was predicted to have a substantial correlation than with the other measures (the exception being the correlation of belief in supernatural forces with Revised Paranormal 	Multi:  p15.06
substantial correlation than with the other measures (the exception being the correlation of belief in supernatural forces with Revised Paranormal Belief Scale This pattern of results provides support for the convergent and divergent validity of the new questionnaire. INSERT TABLE 2.1 HERE Statistically significant bivariate correlates (with the exception of Revised Paranormal Belief Scale scores) of the four Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs subscales were entered into four regression analyses wherein in turn each Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs subscale was designated as the dependent variable. Age, ethnicity, employment status, and income, had no relationship with any of the 	Multi:  p15.29
subscale was designated as the dependent variable. Age, ethnicity, employment status, and income, had no relationship with any of the subscales of the MQSUB. With belief in supernatural forces as the target variable, the predictors entered in the multiple regression were gender, relationship status coded as single or not, religious affiliation coded as religious or not, and fantasy proneness. The four predictors together accounted for 29% of the variance in BSF. Only fantasy proneness, however, was a significant independent predictor, t=4.79, p<0.001, beta = 0.41. With belief in the influence of God and destiny as the target variable, the predictors 	Multi:  p15.53
t=4.79, p<0.001, beta = 0.41. With belief in the influence of God and destiny as the target variable, the predictors were religious affiliation and fantasy proneness. Together these variables predicted 10% of the variance in the target variable. Religious affiliation was a significant independent predictor, t=2.48, p<0.05, beta = 0.22, and fantasy proneness was a marginally significant predictor, t=1.90, p<0.07, beta = 0.17. With belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies as the target variable, the predictors fantasy proneness, relationship status, and religious affiliation together explained 13% of the variance. Only fantasy proneness was a significant independent predictor, t=3.16, p<0.005, beta = 	Multi:  p15.76
religious affiliation together explained 13% of the variance. Only fantasy proneness was a significant independent predictor, t=3.16, p<0.005, beta = 0.29. With belief in consciousness beyond the body as the target variable, the predictors fantasy was a significant independent predictor, t=3.18, p<0.005, beta = 0.27, and so was fantasy proneness, t=3.38, p<0.005, beta = 0.29. The relationship of all subscales of the questionnaire with fantasy proneness is consistent with the literature, showing that fantasy proneness is related to many types of paranormal belief and experience . The relationship of religious affiliation with belief in the influence of God and destiny and 	Multi:  p15.99
paranormal belief and experience . The relationship of religious affiliation with belief in the influence of God and destiny and belief in consciousness beyond the body is readily understood by the conceptual overlap between these subscales and common elements of religious belief. It is, perhaps, surprising that there were no observed gender differences as the literature shows a frequent though weak effect of gender on many aspects of belief. Nevertheless, it should be noted that females scored higher on belief in supernatural forces in the simple bivariate comparison. The absence of gender effects may be due to a general decrease 	Multi:  p16.28
in supernatural forces in the simple bivariate comparison. The absence of gender effects may be due to a general decrease in gender differences in paranormal belief . Alternatively, the frequently observed gender differences in levels of belief may be due to the underlying trait of fantasy proneness, rather than gender per se; fantasy proneness was higher in females than in males in the present study, t = 2.18, p<0.05. Other studies reporting gender differences may not have measured fantasy proneness or entered both variables into a multiple regression to predict level of belief. Another potentially surprising result is that belief in 	Multi:  p16.57
entered both variables into a multiple regression to predict level of belief. Another potentially surprising result is that belief in the influence of God and destiny does not appear to increase with age, apparently contradicting the generally accepted knowledge that older generations are more religious than younger generations. It is possible that though belief in God may increase with age, belief in concepts associated with destiny deceases , so that there is no overall relationship. The Social Marginality Hypothesis proposed that disadvantaged groups in society might turn to belief in the paranormal as an emotional compensation for feelings of powerlessness or 	Multi:  p16.86
disadvantaged groups in society might turn to belief in the paranormal as an emotional compensation for feelings of powerlessness or alienation in their lives. This predicts that belief would be higher in the elderly, those not in relationships, the unemployed, those with lower income, those with poorer education, and among minority ethnic groups. The absence of any relationship between the subscales of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs and demographic factors including age, marital status, ethnicity, employment status, and income, argues against the Social Marginality Hypothesis as operationalised by simple demographics measures. A more nuanced view of social marginality 	Multi:  p17.14
income, argues against the Social Marginality Hypothesis as operationalised by simple demographics measures. A more nuanced view of social marginality therefore was examined in Study 4. In summary, the convergent validity of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs is attested to by the strong correlations between the subscales of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs and the scores on existing questionnaires with conceptually similar or overlapping content. Divergent validity is supported by less substantive correlations where there is less conceptual similarity between the scales examined. Study 3 The aim of Study 3 was to continue the investigation of the 	Multi:  p17.41
conceptual similarity between the scales examined. Study 3 The aim of Study 3 was to continue the investigation of the convergent and discriminant validity of the new MQSUB. Convergent validity would be supported by a substantive correlation between the Australian Sheep Goat Scale and the belief in supernatural forces subscale which has overlapping conceptual content, and a moderate correlation with the belief in consciousness beyond the body subscale which has some overlapping content in so far as it assumes the existence of some aspect of soul or mind that can exist outside the body. Divergent validity would be supported by the 	Multi:  p17.68
of some aspect of soul or mind that can exist outside the body. Divergent validity would be supported by the observation of weaker correlations with the subscales of the Rational Experiential Inventory . There is a substantial body of research linking paranormal belief with an experiential/intuitive thinking style . A smaller body of research links paranormal belief with lower levels of rational thinking . Correlations were predicted as follows: belief in supernatural forces should correlate substantively with the ASGS; belief in consciousness beyond the body should correlate moderately with the ASGS; MQSUBs subscales correlate moderately with Rational-Experiential Inventory Experiential thinking; 	Multi:  p17.96
in consciousness beyond the body should correlate moderately with the ASGS; MQSUBs subscales correlate moderately with Rational-Experiential Inventory Experiential thinking; and, small correlations of MQSUBs subscales with Rational-Experiential Inventory Rational thinking. As in Study 2, small to moderate correlations were predicted among all the scales of the MQSUB. Finally, the relationship of Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs scores to demographic variables and individual traits should resemble the relationships of conceptually similar scales in previous studies . Method Participants There were 168 participants, a subset of those recruited to Study 1. There were 129 women and 39 men. Their ages ranged 	Multi:  p18.29
168 participants, a subset of those recruited to Study 1. There were 129 women and 39 men. Their ages ranged from 18 to 77, mean age = 32.1 years, SD = 14.0. Of these, 52 were married, 19 were cohabiting, 85 were single, 7 were divorced, 3 were widowed and 2 were separated. Educationally, 41 were educated to age 16, 44 to age 18, and 83 had university or professional qualifications. There were 60 students, 4 unemployed, 2 home makers, with the rest spread among other ethnicities. Religious affiliation was varied: 83 had no religion, 55 were Christian, 20 were Muslim, 	Multi:  p18.65
the rest spread among other ethnicities. Religious affiliation was varied: 83 had no religion, 55 were Christian, 20 were Muslim, and 10 gave their religion as Hindu, Sikh or “other”. Design Participants completed a series of questionnaires online: the new Multi Dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs; the Australian Sheep Goat Scale (ASGS); the Rational Experiential Inventory (REI); and the demographic questions. The questionnaires were always completed in this order and the procedure took around thirty minutes. Measures The Australian Sheep Goat Scale consists of 18 items designed to measure belief in telepathy, psychokinesis, precognition, and life after death. Items include: 	Multi:  p19
Goat Scale consists of 18 items designed to measure belief in telepathy, psychokinesis, precognition, and life after death. Items include: `I believe in life after death\' and `I believe I am psychic\'. Items are scored 0 = false, 1 = uncertain, or 2 = true. The internal consistency was good in the present study, Cronbach’s alpha = 0.92. The Rational Experiential Inventory consists of 40 questions designed to reveal individual preference for rational thinking scored `I’m not that good at figuring out complicated problems\') and intuitive or experiential thinking (e.g., `I like to rely on my intuitive impressions\' and reverse 	Multi:  p19.38
figuring out complicated problems\') and intuitive or experiential thinking (e.g., `I like to rely on my intuitive impressions\' and reverse scored `I don’t have a very good sense of intuition\'). Internal consistency was good in the present study; Cronbach’s alpha was 0.9 for the Rationality scale and 0.92 for the Experientiality scale. Procedure Participants were recruited via social media and completed the set of questionnaires online. The only inclusion criteria were that the participant should be over 18 years old with a good command of written English. The following questionnaires were completed, always in this sequence: the new Multi Dimensional Questionnaire 	Multi:  p19.76
a good command of written English. The following questionnaires were completed, always in this sequence: the new Multi Dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs; the ASGS; the REI; and, the demographic questions. The set of questionnaires took around thirty minutes to complete and participants could pause the questionnaires and return within seven days. After completion, participants were given debriefing information and invited to contact the researcher if they had any further questions about the study. Results and Discussion All questions were compulsory so there were no missing data. There were no cases where a participant had selected the same response option 	Multi:  p20.1
compulsory so there were no missing data. There were no cases where a participant had selected the same response option for all (or nearly all) items, and so all were included in the analysis. The total scores on each of the four subscales of the new Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs were calculated as the mean of the items on the scale, with some items reverse scored as indicated in Study 1. Internal reliability of the subscales was good: Cronbach’s alpha = 0.88 for BSF, 0.83 for BIGD, 0.71 for BAMC, and 0.86 for BCB. The score on the 	Multi:  p20.4
Cronbach’s alpha = 0.88 for BSF, 0.83 for BIGD, 0.71 for BAMC, and 0.86 for BCB. The score on the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale was calculated as the sum of the items. The score on each subscale of the Rational-Experiential Inventory was calculated as the sum of the items on the corresponding subscale, with items reverse scored as appropriate. Means and standard deviations of the scales and facets are shown in Table 3.1. Bivariate correlations among the variables are also shown in Table 3.1. INSERT TABLE 3.1 HERE Scores on the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale were correlated strongly with BSF, and moderately with 	Multi:  p20.69
Table 3.1. INSERT TABLE 3.1 HERE Scores on the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale were correlated strongly with BSF, and moderately with BCB, as predicted. There were also small correlations with belief in the influence of God and destiny and BAMC, which were not specifically predicted but unsurprising given the tendency for correlations among subscales of belief. As predicted, there was a positive correlation between the intuitive scale of the Rational-Experiential Inventory and all subscales of the MQSUB, and a smaller negative correlation that reached statistical significance only for belief in supernatural forces and belief in the influence of God and destiny with 	Multi:  p20.98
that reached statistical significance only for belief in supernatural forces and belief in the influence of God and destiny with the rational scale of the REI. The correlations among the subscales of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs were smaller in Study 3, ranging from 0.06 to 0.48, than in Study 2 where they ranged from 0.37 to 0.56. It is interesting to note that despite the difference in the magnitude of the correlations they still followed the same pattern: the largest correlations were belief in supernatural forces with the other three factors and belief in the influence of 	Multi:  p21.2
pattern: the largest correlations were belief in supernatural forces with the other three factors and belief in the influence of God and destiny with BCB; followed by the correlation of belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies with BCB; and the smallest correlation was belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies with BIGD. Statistically significant bivariate correlates (with the exception of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scores) of the four Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs subscales were entered into four regression analyses wherein in turn each Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs subscale was designated as the dependent variable. Age, gender, and educational status 	Multi:  p21.41
turn each Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs subscale was designated as the dependent variable. Age, gender, and educational status had no relationship with any of the subscales of the MQSUB. With belief in supernatural forces as the target variable, the predictors were relationship status (coded as single or not), employment status (coded as working or not), rational thinking, and experiential thinking. Income also had a significant bivariate correlation but was omitted because of its strong correlation with employment status = 0.71). The four predictors together accounted for 18% of the variance in BSF. Employment status was a significant independent predictor, 	Multi:  p21.62
0.71). The four predictors together accounted for 18% of the variance in BSF. Employment status was a significant independent predictor, t=2.37, p<0.05, beta = 0.18, as was rational thinking, t=2.79, p<0.01, beta = 0.20, and experiential thinking, t=4.41, p<0.001, beta = 0.32. With belief in the influence of God and destiny as the target variable, the predictors were employment status, ethnicity (coded as white European or other), religious affiliation (coded as yes or no), rational thinking and experiential thinking. These five predictors together explained 52% of the variance in BIGD. The variables religious affiliation, ethnicity, rational thinking and experiential thinking 	Multi:  p21.84
five predictors together explained 52% of the variance in BIGD. The variables religious affiliation, ethnicity, rational thinking and experiential thinking were all significant independent predictors of BIGD. Higher scores on belief in the influence of God and destiny were associated with religious affiliation, t=5.37, p<0.001, beta = 0.32, non white European ethnicity, t=6.59, p<0.001, beta = 0.43, lower scores on rational thinking, t=4.09, p<0.001, beta = 0.32, and higher scores on experiential thinking, t=3.98, p<0.001, beta = 0.22. Scores on belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies were significantly bivariately correlated only with experiential thinking, r = 2.37, p<0.05, beta = 0.18, 	Multi:  p22.05
in aliens, monsters and conspiracies were significantly bivariately correlated only with experiential thinking, r = 2.37, p<0.05, beta = 0.18, which accounted for only 3% of the variance in BAMC. With belief in consciousness beyond the body as the target variable, the predictors were ethnicity, religious affiliation, and experiential thinking. These three predictors accounted for 15% of the variance in BCB. Participants with religious affiliation had higher scores on belief in consciousness beyond the body than those with no religion, t=3.49, p<0.005, beta = 0.27, and belief in consciousness beyond the body was related to experiential thinking, t = 3.25, p<0.005, 	Multi:  p22.29
p<0.005, beta = 0.27, and belief in consciousness beyond the body was related to experiential thinking, t = 3.25, p<0.005, beta = 0.24. The correlations between the subscales of the MQSUBs, intuitive thinking (positive correlation), and rational thinking (negative correlation), were consistent with previous research . It is unsurprising that having a religious affiliation (compared to no religion) was associated with higher scores on belief in the influence of God and destiny and belief in consciousness beyond the body given the conceptual overlap between these subscales and traditional religious beliefs. The observation of lower levels of belief in the influence 	Multi:  p22.52
the conceptual overlap between these subscales and traditional religious beliefs. The observation of lower levels of belief in the influence of God and destiny in white Europeans compared to other ethnicities is perhaps to be expected given increasing secularisation in the countries of the European Union. The observation of higher scores on the belief in supernatural forces subscale for those participants in employment (or with higher income as these two variables were strongly correlated) compared to those not in employment might seem counterintuitive, given the marginalisation hypothesis of Irwin , but it is not without precedent. For example, Rice reported that 	Multi:  p22.75
seem counterintuitive, given the marginalisation hypothesis of Irwin , but it is not without precedent. For example, Rice reported that higher income was associated with greater belief in psychic healing, and Emmons & Sobal noted that the employed generally showed higher levels of paranormal belief than the unemployed . The absence of gender differences is perhaps unexpected in light of the frequent body of research showing consistent, though small, gender differences but it is noted here that other large studies have failed to find gender differences . In conclusion, Study 3 offers further support for the convergent and divergent validity of 	Multi:  p22.98
failed to find gender differences . In conclusion, Study 3 offers further support for the convergent and divergent validity of the MQSUB. Study 4 Study 4 continued the exploration of the convergent and discriminant validity of the new twenty four item MQSUB. As in Study 3, it is predicted that scores on the Australian Sheep Goat scale will be related substantively to scores on the Supernatural Forces subscale and moderately to those on other subscales. Additionally, the locus of control subscale `belief in powerful others\' was predicted to relate to belief in supernatural forces, belief in the influence of God 	Multi:  p23.28
subscale `belief in powerful others\' was predicted to relate to belief in supernatural forces, belief in the influence of God and destiny, and belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies. The legacy subscale of the mortality awareness questionnaire was predicted to relate to belief in supernatural forces, the mortality acceptance subscale to a belief in God and destiny, the mortality disengagement to relate negatively to a belief in God and destiny, scores on mortality disempowerment were predicted to be associated with belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies via the link between belief in conspiracies and social anomie. As per Irwin , self 	Multi:  p23.57
in aliens, monsters and conspiracies via the link between belief in conspiracies and social anomie. As per Irwin , self perceived marginalisation was predicted to be related to scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs, though only weakly. A larger correlation should be observed between self perceived marginalisation and belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies, following consistent observations that social anomie predicts conspiracist thinking. Reactive rebelliousness was predicted to relate to belief in scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs in general, and in particular to a belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies via the link with a sense of alienation. As in Study 2 and 3, small to 	Multi:  p23.88
aliens, monsters and conspiracies via the link with a sense of alienation. As in Study 2 and 3, small to moderately sized correlations were predicted among all the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs subscales. Finally, the relationship of Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs scores to demographic variables and individual traits should resemble the relationships of conceptually similar scales in previous studies . Method Participants There were 100 participants, a subset of those recruited to Study 1. There were 76 women and 22 men and two who declined to specify. Ages ranged from 18 to 68, mean = 31.24 years, 	Multi:  p24.2
women and 22 men and two who declined to specify. Ages ranged from 18 to 68, mean = 31.24 years, SD = 12.71. 23 were married, 15 cohabiting, and 60 single. 11 were educated to age 16, 13 to age 18, and 75 had university or professional qualifications. 45 were students, 4 unemployed, 3 self designated as home makers, 45 as employed, and 3 as retired. Household income was less than £5,000 per year for 35 participants, £6 25,000 for 40 respondents, and £25 with the remainder spread among other ethnicities. Religious affiliation was varied: 43 self designated as having 	Multi:  p24.53
40 respondents, and £25 with the remainder spread among other ethnicities. Religious affiliation was varied: 43 self designated as having no religion, 30 as Christian, 17 as Muslim, and 7 gave their religion as `other\'. Design A cross sectional correlational self report design was used in which participants responded to a series of questionnaires online in the order as specified below, completion taking approximately thirty minutes. Measures Seven questionnaires were administered, as follows: the new twenty four item Multi Dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs; the Australian Sheep Goat Scale , as described in Study 3; the multi dimensional Locus of 	Multi:  p24.86
of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs; the Australian Sheep Goat Scale , as described in Study 3; the multi dimensional Locus of Control scale which has three subscales measuring internality (the belief that there is a contingent relationship between actions and outcomes, an example item being `I can pretty much determine what will happen in my life\'), belief in the influence of powerful others as determinants of outcomes (an example item being `I feel like what happens in my life is mostly determined by powerful people\'), and belief in the role of chance as a determinant of outcomes (an example item being `to 	Multi:  p25.17
by powerful people\'), and belief in the role of chance as a determinant of outcomes (an example item being `to a great extent my life is controlled by accidental happenings\'); a twelve item measure of self perceived marginalisation as devised by the second author, with responses given on a five point scale from `strongly disagree\' to ` strongly agree\' , an exemplar item being `I think that I am someone who exists on the margins of society\'; the Multi dimensional Mortality Awareness Measure which measures five forms of such awareness (fearfulness, acceptance, disempowerment, disengagement, and mortality legacy awareness), an exemplar 	Multi:  p25.47
Mortality Awareness Measure which measures five forms of such awareness (fearfulness, acceptance, disempowerment, disengagement, and mortality legacy awareness), an exemplar item being `I am aware that death is part of life\'; the Social Reactivity Scale which measures proactive and reactive rebelliousness, an exemplar item being `How often do you do something you shouldn\'t just to get some excitement?\'; and a section containing demographic questions. Procedure The procedure was similar to Studies 2 and 3, with identical inclusion criteria applying. Results and Discussion There were no missing data. There were no cases where a participant had selected the same response option for 	Multi:  p25.76
Discussion There were no missing data. There were no cases where a participant had selected the same response option for all (or nearly all) items, and so all were included in the analysis. All participants were included in the analysis. Given an additional new measure was included in this study, a brief, twelve item, self report measure of Self Perceived Marginalisation as devised by the second author, the results of a one factor principal components analysis of these items is shown in Table 4.1. An initial scree analysis indicated a single factor solution, with 43% variance explained and Cronbach\'s Alpha=0.88, indicating 	Multi:  p26.06
in Table 4.1. An initial scree analysis indicated a single factor solution, with 43% variance explained and Cronbach\'s Alpha=0.88, indicating good internal reliability. All twelve items load substantively onto the factor at above 0.5, with the lead item being item 8: I think that I am someone who exists on the margins of society. INSERT TABLE 4.1 HERE Total scores for each of the four subscales of the new Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs were calculated as in Study 1. Internal reliability for each subscale was good: Cronbach’s alpha = 0.89 for BSF, 0.88 for BIGD, 0.75 for BAMC, 	Multi:  p26.34
1. Internal reliability for each subscale was good: Cronbach’s alpha = 0.89 for BSF, 0.88 for BIGD, 0.75 for BAMC, and 0.91 for belief in consciousness beyond the body . The score on the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale was calculated as the sum of the items. Means and standard deviations of the scales and facets are shown in Table 4.2. Bivariate correlations among the variables are also shown in Table 4.2. INSERT TABLE 4.2 HERE Statistically significant bivariate correlates (with the exception of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scores) of the four Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs subscales were entered into four regression 	Multi:  p26.61
of Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scores) of the four Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs subscales were entered into four regression analyses wherein in turn each Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs subscale was designated as the dependent variable. For the belief in supernatural forces subscale, three variables were found to independently predict scores on this component (with adj. R mortality legacy awareness , mortality acceptance (beta = = .25, t= and gender . For belief in the influence of God and destiny, one bivariate correlate in the regression analysis emerged as an independent predictor , namely mortality disengagement (beta= 0.34, t= 	Multi:  p26.89
destiny, one bivariate correlate in the regression analysis emerged as an independent predictor , namely mortality disengagement (beta= 0.34, t= while proactive rebelliousness approached significance . For the belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies factor, no one variable emerged as an independent predictor . For scores on the belief in consciousness beyond the body subscale of the MSQUB, three bivariate correlates emerged as independent predictors ; self perceived marginalisation , mortality disempowerment awareness (beta= 0.37, t= and mortality legacy awareness . The pattern of the relative magnitude of correlations among the four factors of the MQSUBs is similar to that 	Multi:  p27.17
. The pattern of the relative magnitude of correlations among the four factors of the MQSUBs is similar to that in Study 2 and 3, thereby providing replication. Australian Sheep-Goat Scale was substantively correlated with BSF, replicating the findings of Study 3, as predicted from the overlap in terms of the conceptual content of the items. It can be seen that various forms of mortality awareness are independently related with three of the MSQUB subscales, with scores on the belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies subscale, beliefs in aliens, monsters and conspiracies, being the exception. Notably, mortality disengagement is inversely related 	Multi:  p27.44
aliens, monsters and conspiracies subscale, beliefs in aliens, monsters and conspiracies, being the exception. Notably, mortality disengagement is inversely related to beliefs in God and destiny, with higher scores on belief in the influence of God and destiny covarying with lower mortality disengagement, thereby suggesting that beliefs in deities and fate is associated with an enhanced ability to not avoid (or engage with) the fact of one\'s eventual demise. In addition, mortality disempowerment was seen to be independently and negatively related to beliefs in consciousness beyond the body. Consistent with this was the finding that self perceived marginalisation (also about a 	Multi:  p27.71
to beliefs in consciousness beyond the body. Consistent with this was the finding that self perceived marginalisation (also about a sense of disempowerment) likewise predicted scores on this form of scientifically unsubstantiated belief, albeit that bivariately such self perceptions were correlated with all four MSQUB subscale scores. However, mortality disempowerment was negatively related to belief in consciousness beyond the body and marginalisation was positively related to BCB. It is possible that self perceived marginalisation promotes a need for belief, and then the chosen area of belief satisfies a more specific and focused area of need. Further, mortality acceptance (inversely) and 	Multi:  p27.99
then the chosen area of belief satisfies a more specific and focused area of need. Further, mortality acceptance (inversely) and mortality legacy (positively) were both found to be independently related to belief in supernatural forces (belief in supernatural forces), though in different directions: people who do not have a sense of mortality acceptance are more likely to believe in supernatural forces; whilst those who have a heightened sense of mortality legacy, of wanting to leave something behind after death, are more likely to believe in supernatural forces, Arguably, however, both of these forms of mortality awareness (high legacy and low acceptance) 	Multi:  p28.26
likely to believe in supernatural forces, Arguably, however, both of these forms of mortality awareness (high legacy and low acceptance) are about a non acceptance of death; covariance with belief in supernatural forces that likewise transcend death is consistent thereby with such an orientation. General Discussion The new Multi Dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs (MQSUB) consists of four subscales measuring belief in a broad range of phenomena. Beliefs in this area have been assumed to be organised into several factors, but with disagreement about the number of components. This study clarifies the nature and number of the factors by starting 	Multi:  p28.55
but with disagreement about the number of components. This study clarifies the nature and number of the factors by starting from a broad range of conceptual possibilities. The first subscale measures belief in supernatural forces (BSF), including traditional superstitions, future prediction, energy healing, ghosts, and telepathy. The second subscale measures belief in the influence of God and destiny (BIGD) including traditional religious concepts (creation, rules for moral behaviour, and life after death) and the inescapable influence of fate or destiny. The third subscale measures belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies (BAMC) with items addressing alien visitation and the Loch Ness 	Multi:  p28.83
The third subscale measures belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies (BAMC) with items addressing alien visitation and the Loch Ness monster, and popular conspiracies, for example national governments routinely lying to the general public and pharmaceutical companies withholding cures. The fourth and final subscale measures belief that a conscious existence can continue independent of the body (BCB; belief in consciousness beyond the body). The four subscales correlate with each other at small to moderate levels of association, confirming their relative independence and yet at the same time consistent with observations from previous research that belief in distinct types of scientifically unsubstantiated 	Multi:  p29.11
and yet at the same time consistent with observations from previous research that belief in distinct types of scientifically unsubstantiated phenomena tend to co occur. Strong support for the convergent and divergent validity of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs was observed in Studies 2, 3 and 4. There were moderate to large correlations between the dimensions of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs and other existing measures, and their individual facets, with overlapping conceptual content Goat Scale, and Generic Conspiracist Belief Scale). Smaller correlations with existing measures were observed where a dimension of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically 	Multi:  p29.38
Generic Conspiracist Belief Scale). Smaller correlations with existing measures were observed where a dimension of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs did not have explicitly overlapping content, in line with previous observations of a general tendency to entertain scientifically unsubstantiated belief. There were also small to moderate correlations with other psychological variables to which the dimensions of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs were predicted to be related . The new Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs represents an advance on previous questionnaire measures by including an expanded conceptual repertoire as covered by its four dimensions within a focused 	Multi:  p29.65
advance on previous questionnaire measures by including an expanded conceptual repertoire as covered by its four dimensions within a focused and practical instrument of 24 items. The belief in supernatural forces subscale includes a range of items in a single factor, adding strength to the argument of Lange et al that all of these items combine into a single component which they termed new age philosophy. The other three dimensions have not been so clearly apparent in previous measures that did not include items covering aspects of them. The belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies dimension combines three facets of 	Multi:  p29.93
did not include items covering aspects of them. The belief in aliens, monsters and conspiracies dimension combines three facets of belief: alien visitation, monsters, and conspiracies, into a single factor that seems to address the belief that there is knowledge kept hidden from the public. The belief in the influence of God and destiny combines these two aspects of belief into one dimension, not explicit in previous measures that did not tap into both of these elements. The belief in consciousness existing beyond the body is now a well focused, explicit belief, not subsumed into other more specific areas of belief 	Multi:  p30.17
existing beyond the body is now a well focused, explicit belief, not subsumed into other more specific areas of belief (such as ghosts, or astral travel). Some of the relationships between the subscales of the Multi-dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs and other existing measures are of particular interest. Self perceived marginalisation in Study 4 was related bivariately to all subscales of the MQSUBs and independently in regression to belief in consciousness beyond the body, thereby supporting the Social Marginalisation Hypothesis of Irwin . This contrasts with the absence of statistically significant multivariate relationships with the demographic proxy indicators of marginalisation 	Multi:  p30.41
of Irwin . This contrasts with the absence of statistically significant multivariate relationships with the demographic proxy indicators of marginalisation such as educational status and household income, and with the absence even of simple bivariate relationships for most of the demographic variables in Study 2 and 3. Such demographic factors however, may not be good indicators of the more subjective aspects of self perceived marginalisation, whereas the individual’s perception of their status and influence in society would appear to be more pertinent to their individual beliefs. Previous observations of gender differences were not repeated here with the exception of belief 	Multi:  p30.65
more pertinent to their individual beliefs. Previous observations of gender differences were not repeated here with the exception of belief in supernatural forces in Study 2 and Study 4, with this difference disappearing in Study 2 when fantasy proneness was also used as a predictor. It is possible that in recent times gender differences, which have generally been small, are becoming less pronounced . Another possibility is that gender differences are not based on gender per se but on other, related psychological variables, for example fantasy proneness, which was not routinely included in previous research. Notably in Study 4, various aspects 	Multi:  p30.89
psychological variables, for example fantasy proneness, which was not routinely included in previous research. Notably in Study 4, various aspects of mortality awareness were found to be independent predictors of scores on three of the four MSQUB subscales. This indicates that an awareness of one\'s three score years and ten has bearing psychologically on the degree to which one maintains scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs. Indeed, it is apparent that such beliefs may form part of a defence against such mortality awareness, though it should be noted here that Fafias, Newheiser, Kahane & Toledo have found that cuing mortality awareness increases belief in 	Multi:  p31.15
it should be noted here that Fafias, Newheiser, Kahane & Toledo have found that cuing mortality awareness increases belief in forms of rationality as well as irrationality, in particular in a belief in science and scientific reasoning. Therefore, mortality salience appears to have more general effect on beliefs, not confined to the scientifically unsubstantiated. Future research needs to take account of the complexity of the nature of scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs in order for consistency of findings across studies to emerge. Studies 2, 3, and 4 have illustrated that distinct subscales of belief have different relationships with other psychological variables. No 	Multi:  p31.44
Studies 2, 3, and 4 have illustrated that distinct subscales of belief have different relationships with other psychological variables. No simple understanding can be reached for relationships between, for example, mortality awareness, marginalisation, rebelliousness, fantasy proneness, thinking style, or conspiracist thinking, and scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs without considering the nature of the belief. Investigations of scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs should have sufficient scope in order to ensure that appropriate questions are asked. Too narrow a frame of reference can result in apparent relationships that may not align precisely with underlying psychological constructs. For example, gender differences may be due to differences in the 	Multi:  p31.72
that may not align precisely with underlying psychological constructs. For example, gender differences may be due to differences in the level of fantasy proneness and not gender per se, and marginalisation as a covariate has not been apparent in the past using simple demographic measures but was evident in Study 4 where questions focused upon self perceived marginalisation. This underscores the importance of measuring psychological variables appropriately. Fantasy proneness as an individual difference variable was linked in Study 2 with all four subscales of scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs to varying degrees. Conceptually, it is feasible to see how the ability to lose 	Multi:  p32.01
four subscales of scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs to varying degrees. Conceptually, it is feasible to see how the ability to lose oneself in an exercise of imagination and to create a fantasy that can be nearly as vivid as the real world might facilitate the maintenance of scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs. It would be of interest to investigate longitudinally the psychodynamic functions hypothesis of Irwin to ascertain to what extent childhood insecurity and trauma can lead to fantasy proneness, and thus to scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs. Future research needs to examine how well the factor structure translates across cultures. There may be broad 	Multi:  p32.28
scientifically unsubstantiated beliefs. Future research needs to examine how well the factor structure translates across cultures. There may be broad agreement regarding the factors, but with some specific items of belief aligning in different relation to the factors. For example, belief in astrology appeared here in the Belief in Supernatural Forces factor in conjunction with belief in superstitions and future prediction, but in other cultures with a different tradition (for example, Hinduism) astrology might be an element of religious belief. Other research could examine whether the relationship between beliefs and other psychological concepts may vary under different religious traditions. For example, 	Multi:  p32.55
research could examine whether the relationship between beliefs and other psychological concepts may vary under different religious traditions. For example, mortality awareness may prompt different kinds of belief in different spiritual contexts. Locus of control may not relate to belief in the same way in collectivistic cultures, where one’s life options are more constrained by societal expectations, and hence locus of control is less internal, as compared with individualistic cultures. Some research has demonstrated that experimentally increasing individual levels of mortality awareness or placing individuals under stress can result in heightened levels of declared belief in the paranormal . Future experiments 	Multi:  p32.82
awareness or placing individuals under stress can result in heightened levels of declared belief in the paranormal . Future experiments could manipulate mortality awareness or stress to examine the effect on scores on the subscales of scientifically unsubstantiated belief. In conclusion, the new Multi dimensional Questionnaire of Scientifically Unsubstantiated Beliefs (MQSUB) offers a concise but conceptually broad ranging measure with good psychometric properties. In the digital age, where information is so readily available and it is easier than ever to acquire beliefs outside of a formal educational setting, a valid and reliable measure of scientifically unsubstantiated belief is useful to 	Multi:  p33.21
acquire beliefs outside of a formal educational setting, a valid and reliable measure of scientifically unsubstantiated belief is useful to understand how people come to acquire and maintain such ideas. Hanging a mirror in a special place can bring good fortune to a house. Study of the stars can be used to predict the future for individuals. Tarot cards can be used to predict major events in an individual’s future. The appearance of lines on a person’s palm can be used to interpret their future. Lucky objects, for example, a rabbit’s foot, can protect against evil. Crystals can have healing powers. 	Multi:  p33.78
to interpret their future. Lucky objects, for example, a rabbit’s foot, can protect against evil. Crystals can have healing powers. There is no evidence for the healing effects of crystals. (R) Touching wood can bring good luck. Good luck cannot be created by crossing ones fingers. (R) Natural events can be omens that predict the future. Some people who have died a violent death can linger as a ghost near the place where they met their end. Some people can read thoughts directly from another person’s mind. Some people can cast spells to cause good effects on other people. There is 	Multi:  p39.11
thoughts directly from another person’s mind. Some people can cast spells to cause good effects on other people. There is no truth in astrology. (R) Unlucky things are likely to happen on Friday the 13th. Chi is a flow of energy which permeates all living creatures. Some people can move objects with the power of their mind. Some people can see events before they happen. Some people can locate water underground by using their special powers. Reading thoughts directly from a person’s mind cannot happen. (R) A horseshoe cannot protect against evil. (R) Homeopathy is an effective form of medicine. 	Multi:  p39.28
a person’s mind cannot happen. (R) A horseshoe cannot protect against evil. (R) Homeopathy is an effective form of medicine. The appearance of tea leaves in the bottom of a cup has no influence on future events. (R) The idea of Chi as a life force is a metaphor but is not literally true. (R) There is no convincing evidence that anyone can move objects with the power of their mind. (R) Some people can cause bad fortune for other people merely by looking at them. Good fortune cannot be invoked by re arranging the furniture in a home. (R) Inanimate 	Multi:  p39.46
merely by looking at them. Good fortune cannot be invoked by re arranging the furniture in a home. (R) Inanimate objects have no power to predict the future. (R) No day is luckier than any other day. (R) If a person commits bad deeds then karma will intervene to punish them. Any effects of homeopathy are due only to the power of imagination. (R) Spells cannot cause bad effects on animals. (R) God has created rules for correct moral behaviour. The world was created by a God. The world was formed through physical processes without the intervention of a God. (R) 	Multi:  p39.63
world was created by a God. The world was formed through physical processes without the intervention of a God. (R) God is an invention of the human imagination. (R) The creator of the universe takes an interest in human lives. What will happen to me after my death will be determined according to how I have lived my life. It is hard to avoid one’s destiny. Some events are fated to occur. Events occur because of tangible causes in the physical world. (R) Some things are not meant to be. 	Multi:  p39.81
The present study was designed to assess whether the relationship between narcissistic personality and paranormal belief identified by Tobacyk and Mitchell earlier could be replicated with a general population and to see whether the effect could be found with a narrower definition of paranormal beliefs that focuses only on belief in psychic phenomena. 75 participants completed the Narcissistic Personality Inventory and two measures of paranormal belief, the Paranormal Belief Scale and the Australian Sheep Goat Scale. There was no correlation between narcissism and Paranormal Belief Scale scores, but narcissism and Australian Sheep Goat Scale scores were significantly positively correlated. Of the three subscales to the Australian Sheep Goat measure, scores for narcissism correlated with belief in ESP and psychokinesis but not in Life after death. These relationships were interpreted in terms of need for control. 	Narcissism and belief in the paranormal :  p0.01
Research into paranormal beliefs and cognitive functioning has expanded considerably since the last review almost 30 years ago, prompting the need for a comprehensive review. The current systematic review aims to identify the reported associations between paranormal beliefs and cognitive functioning, and to assess study quality. Introduction The term “paranormal” typically refers to phenomena, such as psychokinesis, hauntings, and clairvoyance, which contradict the basic limiting principles of current scientific understanding [1]. Surveys consistently indicate paranormal beliefs are prevalent within the general population. For example, a representative survey of British adults conducted by the market Comparable levels of 	Paranormal beliefs and cognitive function: Abstract:  p0
prevalent within the general population. For example, a representative survey of British adults conducted by the market Comparable levels of belief have been documented across various cultures over recent decades [4–7]. The most frequently used scales to measure paranormal beliefs include Tobacyk’s Paranormal Belief Scale in both original (PBS) [8] and revised form (RPBS) [9], and the Australian Sheep Goat Scale (ASGS) [10]. Despite widespread use, some concerns exist about both the content and the factor structures of these measures [11–13]. Nonetheless, both the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale and Australian Sheep-Goat Scale have demonstrated excellent internal reliability, with Cronbach’s alpha values around .93 for the Revised Paranormal 	Paranormal beliefs and cognitive function: Abstract:  p0.31
Scale and Australian Sheep-Goat Scale have demonstrated excellent internal reliability, with Cronbach’s alpha values around .93 for the Revised Paranormal Belief Scale [14–16], and around .95 for the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale [17, 18]. sciences, medicine, and psychology showing significantly lower paranormal belief scores than those in education, theology, or artistic disciplines [25, 26]. Higher levels of paranormal beliefs have been documented in women and younger individuals [27–32], though these sex and age effects are inconsistently reported [33] and have generated substantial debate [34–36]. Paranormal beliefs and cognitive function The association between cognitive functioning and paranormal beliefs has been researched over several decades. Such functions include memory, attention, 	Paranormal beliefs and cognitive function: Abstract:  p0.67
function The association between cognitive functioning and paranormal beliefs has been researched over several decades. Such functions include memory, attention, language, and executive function (the umbrella term used to describe set As important for cognitive function is an individual’s belief system. Religious and spiritual beliefs have been associated with slower cognitive decline in older adults [38, 39] but have also been shown to have an inverse relationship with memory performance [40] and intelligence [41, 42]. Similarly, so called “epistemically unwarranted beliefs” [19], which includes belief in conspiracy theories, has been linked with lower educational attainment and reduced analytical thinking [43, 44]. Conspiracist beliefs are similarly associated with 	Paranormal beliefs and cognitive function: Abstract:  p1.01
theories, has been linked with lower educational attainment and reduced analytical thinking [43, 44]. Conspiracist beliefs are similarly associated with increased illusory pattern perception [45, 46], decreased need for cognition and cognitive reflection [47–49], biases against confirmatory and disconfirmatory evidence [50], and hindsight bias . The last published review to examine the relationships between paranormal beliefs and various aspects of cognition was conducted by Irwin in 1993 [53]. That non systematic narrative review of 43 studies is now almost 30 years old and may have introduced bias by “…citing null results only when these form a substantial proportion of the available data on a given relationship” . 	Paranormal beliefs and cognitive function: Abstract:  p1.33
by “…citing null results only when these form a substantial proportion of the available data on a given relationship” . At the time of his review, Irwin [53] concluded that, owing to the variable findings, support for the cognitive deficits hypothesis remained uncertain. Research has grown considerably since Irwin’s [53] review and an updated and systematic review is timely. The current review has two key aims: first, to provide the first assessment of study quality [54] in this area and second, to systematically review and summarise key associations between paranormal beliefs and a range of cognitive functions. 	Paranormal beliefs and cognitive function: Abstract:  p1.65
do some types of settings and some combinations of sensory information induce a sense of dread in humans? This article brings empirical evidence from psychological research to bear on the experience of horror, and explains why the tried and true horror devices intuitively employed by writers and filmmakers work so well. Natural selection has favored individuals who gravitated toward environments containing the “right” physical and psychological features and avoided those which posed a threat. Places that contain a bad mix of these features induce unpleasant feelings of dread and fear, 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p0
which posed a threat. Places that contain a bad mix of these features induce unpleasant feelings of dread and fear, and therefore have become important ingredients of the settings for horror fiction and films. This article applies McAndrew and Koehnke’s theory of creepiness to the study of classic horror settings and explores the role played by architecture, isolation, association with death, and other environmental qualities in the experience of creepiness and dread. Keywords: horror, architecture, ghosts, haunted houses, paranormal experiences, environmental psychology, evolutionary psychology Scholars in a range of academic disciplines including philosophy , geography and psychology have long recognized 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p0.27
environmental psychology, evolutionary psychology Scholars in a range of academic disciplines including philosophy , geography and psychology have long recognized the importance of “place” in human experience. Our daily physical surroundings play an important role in creating order, meaning, and stability in our lives, and the cultural rituals that make up the very fabric of social and religious life have historically been inseparable from the physical spaces in which they transpire . In short, a sense of the place we live is closely related to our personal identity since so much of who we are depends upon where we live 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p0.58
live is closely related to our personal identity since so much of who we are depends upon where we live and the experiences that we have had there . But what happens when the physical space around us creates feelings of disorientation and dread rather than feelings of comfort, predictability, and security? Although other scholars have reflected on this question by examining the role played by the settings and ambient sensation in horror fiction and film, especially when the story grows out of the Gothic tradition , they have typically not taken advantage of recent research on evolved psychology to 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p0.89
grows out of the Gothic tradition , they have typically not taken advantage of recent research on evolved psychology to make sense of their findings. These literary analyses focus on fictional spaces, but I contend that fictional spaces are effective precisely because they accurately, albeit in a somewhat exaggerated fashion, reflect the components of real physical spaces that cause people to feel uneasy. It is the goal of this paper to apply what psychologists and other scientists have learned about human emotional responses to physical surroundings to understanding why some settings and some combinations of sensory information can induce a sense 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p1.1
emotional responses to physical surroundings to understanding why some settings and some combinations of sensory information can induce a sense of horror in humans. The hoped for contribution is to bring empirical evidence from psychological research to bear on the experience of horror, and to explain why the tried and true horror devices intuitively employed by writers and filmmakers work so well. The unifying thesis of the article is that places that inspire feelings of creepiness and horror possess combinations of features that humans have evolved to regard with caution, either because such features were associated with the presence of 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p1.26
of features that humans have evolved to regard with caution, either because such features were associated with the presence of predators or other natural hazards, or because they confront us with limited sensory information and a lack of freedom of movement and control which would impair our ability to deal with an emergent threat. We shall begin with a discussion of how humans have been programmed through evolution to respond emotionally to their physical surroundings, and how some emotional experiences, such as creepiness and horror, are related to “agent detection” mechanisms that have evolved to protect us from predators and 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p1.42
such as creepiness and horror, are related to “agent detection” mechanisms that have evolved to protect us from predators and enemies. The paper will then explore how factors such as social isolation and associations of places with death or other troubling events can prime the type of thinking that exacerbates the experience of horror inherent in the geography or architecture of a setting. We are Programmed to Respond Emotionally to Our Physical Surroundings It is well established that the environmental preferences of animals are under genetic control and to some extent this appears to be true for humans as well. 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p1.58
preferences of animals are under genetic control and to some extent this appears to be true for humans as well. Research by environmental psychologists has confirmed that the most attractive natural environments contain things such as running water and open meadows surrounded by woods, the very features that would have been beneficial for the survival of early humans . In other words, people who were drawn to the “right” places did better than those who were not, and over time their genes were favored over those of individuals who spent too much time in sparser, more barren landscapes. But places exhibit 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p1.74
genes were favored over those of individuals who spent too much time in sparser, more barren landscapes. But places exhibit more abstract evolutionarily relevant features as well, and it turns out that being drawn to the “right” abstract features of places may have been just as important for our ancestors’ survival. McAndrew has referred to such environmental features as psychological features, and places that lack the right psychological features set off our creep detectors. British geographer Jay Appleton was the first to describe two qualities of physical space that determine whether a place is attractive or frightening to humans: “Prospect” 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p1.9
first to describe two qualities of physical space that determine whether a place is attractive or frightening to humans: “Prospect” and “Refuge.” Refuge means having a secure, protected place to hide where one can be sheltered from danger, while prospect refers to one’s clear, unobstructed view of the landscape. Attractive places offer us a lot of prospect and a lot of refuge, or what landscape architect Randolph Hester refers to as a “Womb with a View.” Our love of such spaces shows up everywhere. Universally, children love playing in enclosed spaces such as cardboard boxes, tree houses, and in bushes 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p2.06
spaces shows up everywhere. Universally, children love playing in enclosed spaces such as cardboard boxes, tree houses, and in bushes or other dense vegetation where they feel hidden; the concepts of prospect and refuge may help explain the almost magical quality of the feelings evoked by memories of favorite childhood hiding places and the richness of detail that can often be recalled about them decades later. Similarly, diners in restaurants usually prefer to occupy tables in corners or nooks, especially when these locations allow them to sit with their backs against a wall, and they will usually only settle for 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p2.2
when these locations allow them to sit with their backs against a wall, and they will usually only settle for tables in the center of the room when all of the more desirable seats have been taken . In the words of Appleton, we love the feel of these spaces because they are, evolutionarily speaking, places where “you can see without being seen, and eat without being eaten” . The optimal environment for human comfort is one that offers a lot of prospect and refuge for the individual; the worst combination is very little prospect or refuge for the individual. Research 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p2.35
of prospect and refuge for the individual; the worst combination is very little prospect or refuge for the individual. Research has confirmed that places that offer bad combinations of prospect and refuge for us are perceived as unsafe and dangerous , also because they may offer a lot of hiding places for people or things that may intend to do us harm. Scary places may also lack what environmental psychologists refer to as “legibility.” Legibility reflects the ease with which a place can be recognized, organized into a pattern and recalled—in other words, a place that we can wander around 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p2.5
a place can be recognized, organized into a pattern and recalled—in other words, a place that we can wander around in without getting lost . More legible places are usually preferred over less legible ones, but if we feel assured that a place is not dangerous, a dose of illegibility can actually enhance the attractiveness of a place to us; this property has been referred to as “Mystery.” Mystery implies that the place contains more information than can be seen at the moment, and that one could learn much about it by walking through it and exploring. The strategic use 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p2.65
at the moment, and that one could learn much about it by walking through it and exploring. The strategic use of mystery has been used to great effect by landscape architects in settings such as Japanese gardens . Many studies have confirmed that people do in fact perceive mystery as a distinct quality of landscapes and that a sense of mystery can increase the attractiveness of natural environments . However, when a heightened sense of mystery is accompanied by a sense of potential danger, as it is in deep narrow canyons, dark urban alleys, and houses thought to be haunted, 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p2.8
sense of potential danger, as it is in deep narrow canyons, dark urban alleys, and houses thought to be haunted, mystery decreases the attractiveness of the place It is not only the psychological features of places that can make them good settings for horror. Physical features that posed a threat to our ancestors can easily become creepy, even if they have other qualities that make them beneficial to us; water is a perfect example of an indispensable and usually attractive element of a natural setting that is frequently associated with horror. Rivers, lakes, and ponds often provide the setting for horror 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p2.95
of a natural setting that is frequently associated with horror. Rivers, lakes, and ponds often provide the setting for horror stories about ghosts. This makes sense in that deep water has always posed a hazard to humans and drowning is a common cause of human death, both accidental and intentional. It is therefore not very surprising to find that bodies of water are frequently linked with paranormal experiences, as in the stories of haunted highways, ponds, wells, ships, and bridges detailed by Davies and Nickell . The kinds of places described above can evoke feelings of fear, horror, and being 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p3.1
detailed by Davies and Nickell . The kinds of places described above can evoke feelings of fear, horror, and being creeped out. It may be useful to think of these three related emotions as different stages of the same experience. Getting creeped out is an unpleasant state of heightened vigilance in which we grapple with ambiguity in our immediate situation. We are not sure if there is an actual danger or threat to be wary of, but the lack of clarity focuses our attention as we deal with the felt urgency of resolving the ambiguity so that we know how 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p3.24
clarity focuses our attention as we deal with the felt urgency of resolving the ambiguity so that we know how to proceed. Horror, on the other hand, is the growing awareness that we are indeed facing some sort of danger, although we may not yet exactly understand the nature of the threat or how best to deal with it. Fear is the clearest of the three emotions. It occurs when we clearly recognize the nature of the danger that we face and we concoct a strategy for dealing with it. Throughout this paper, the focus will remain firmly fixed on 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p3.38
face and we concoct a strategy for dealing with it. Throughout this paper, the focus will remain firmly fixed on the frightening, negative experience of horror, but it must be acknowledged that under some circumstances creepiness and horror can be seductive , as evidenced by the sums of money we spend each year on horror movies and commercial haunted houses. Clearly, for many people, the creepy can have a peculiar “allure.” How could such things possibly be entertaining to us? I propose that our enjoyment of haunted houses and horror movies taps into the same evolved psychological mechanisms that exist to 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p3.53
propose that our enjoyment of haunted houses and horror movies taps into the same evolved psychological mechanisms that exist to help us learn from the experiences of others In the safety of a movie theater or amusement park, watching other individuals deal with serial killers, zombies, or other paranormal threats gives us the chance to mentally rehearse strategies that we might use if we would ever find ourselves in a similar situation So yes, horror can be fun if it is not the real thing. Having said this, the rest of this article will concern itself with the less fun 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p3.67
is not the real thing. Having said this, the rest of this article will concern itself with the less fun stuff. On the Nature of Creepiness The “threat ambiguity theory” , proposed by McAndrew and Koehnke , helps shed light on why some people appear creepy to us. McAndrew and Koehnke tested their theory by way of an online survey of 1,341 individuals ranging in age from 18 to 77 with a meanage of 28.97. The researchers did not ask participants to report their country of origin, but they reported that an unrelated study using an identical recruitment strategy yielded 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p3.82
participants to report their country of origin, but they reported that an unrelated study using an identical recruitment strategy yielded respondents from 54 different nations, although Americans were by far the largest group. In the first section of the survey, participants rated the likelihood that a hypothetical “creepy person” would exhibit 44 different behaviors, such as unusual patterns of eye contact or physical characteristics like visible tattoos. In the second section of the survey, participants rated the creepiness of 21 different occupations, and in the third section, they simply listed two hobbies that they thought were creepy. In the final 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p3.96
different occupations, and in the third section, they simply listed two hobbies that they thought were creepy. In the final section, participants expressed their level of agreement with 15 statements about the nature of creepy people. The results of the study were consistent with the idea that creepiness is a response to the ambiguity of threat. Non normative non verbal and emotional behaviors, unusual physical characteristics and hobbies, or suspect occupations set off our “creepiness detectors.” Men were more likely to be perceived as creepy by males and females alike, and women were more likely to perceive sexual threat from creepy 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p4.11
be perceived as creepy by males and females alike, and women were more likely to perceive sexual threat from creepy people. Thus, we get creeped out by certain people because they behave in bizarre and unpredictable ways, violating the subtle social conventions that enable us to understand their intentions; this makes it difficult for us to know what to expect when we encounter them. In other words, they present us with an ambiguity as to whether or not they are someone to fear, and this ambiguity makes us very uncomfortable. McAndrew and Koehnke’s theory received support in two experiments conducted 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p4.26
someone to fear, and this ambiguity makes us very uncomfortable. McAndrew and Koehnke’s theory received support in two experiments conducted by Watt, Maitland, and Gallagher . In the Watt et al. studies, people rated faces on creepiness, trustworthiness, and attractiveness, gave detailed reports of specific creepy encounters they had experienced, and described what they believed a prototypical creepy individual would look like. Their results confirmed that men are more likely to be perceived as creepy than women and that uncertainty about whether the person was trustworthy or not was a key ingredient. They also confirmed that physical characteristics such as 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p4.41
about whether the person was trustworthy or not was a key ingredient. They also confirmed that physical characteristics such as an unusually lean body type and unusual facial features, especially in the region of the eyes or teeth, predisposed their participants toward making a judgment of creepiness. Watt and her colleagues noted the quick, non conscious way by which judgments of creepiness occurred, indicating that such judgments are intuitive and rely on emotional reasoning rather than deliberative detailed cognitive analysis. I propose that places can creep us out for the very same reasons that people can, by presenting us with 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p4.56
I propose that places can creep us out for the very same reasons that people can, by presenting us with ambiguous information that makes it unclear if the place poses a threat to us or not. Places can have this effect on us because they activate an evolved psychological adaptation known as an “agent detection mechanism.” Agent Detection Mechanisms Agent detection mechanisms are processes that have evolved to protect us from harm at the hands of predators and enemies. If you’re walking through the woods alone at night and hear the sound of something rustling in the bushes, you will respond 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p4.71
walking through the woods alone at night and hear the sound of something rustling in the bushes, you will respond with a heightened level of arousal and attention. You will behave as if there is a willful “agent” present who is about to do you harm. If it turns out to be a gust of wind or a stray cat, you lose little by overreacting. But if you fail to activate the alarm response and a true threat is present—well, the cost of your miscalculation could be high. The evolutionary precursors of human agent detection mechanisms can be found throughout 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p4.87
the cost of your miscalculation could be high. The evolutionary precursors of human agent detection mechanisms can be found throughout the animal kingdom, and the most relevant of these are evolved responses to predators and to the environments that harbor them. Laboratory rats that have never experienced a natural environment walk along walls within large enclosures as an adaptation to ancestral airborne predators such as hawks and owls, and virtually all primates have an aversion to sleeping on the ground where they might easily be found by predators such as large cats or snakes . Isolated populations of prey animals 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p5.02
where they might easily be found by predators such as large cats or snakes . Isolated populations of prey animals such as Sitka black tailed deer , rodents and Père David’s Deer that have been free of predation for dozens of generations typically display enhanced vigilance and tension in response to environments and stimuli associated with ancestral predators; this is a testament to the genetic durability of these adaptations. Vestiges of such responses have been documented in human children who intuitively understand which environmental affordances offer the best hiding places from predators and who prefer sleeping arrangements that minimize fears 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p5.18
intuitively understand which environmental affordances offer the best hiding places from predators and who prefer sleeping arrangements that minimize fears of things lurking beneath them . So, horror “primes” our agent detection mechanisms and triggers a search for predators. Most horror films exploit this human predilection by making the audience squirm over the uncertainty of whether there is a demon in the house in The Exorcist, whether the hotel in The Shining is truly haunted, or whether there is really anything to fear in the woods in The Blair Witch Project, to cite a few examples. Places are Scarier When 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p5.34
anything to fear in the woods in The Blair Witch Project, to cite a few examples. Places are Scarier When We are Isolated and Alone Humans are a highly social species with a strong need for interaction with others, especially during times of stress; when we go through a trying ordeal alone, a lack of emotional support and comradeship can increase our anxiety and hinder our ability to cope. We rely on others to help us resolve ambiguity, and we rely on them for cooperative defense against threat. It is therefore reasonable to expect that most people have an aversion to 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p5.5
on them for cooperative defense against threat. It is therefore reasonable to expect that most people have an aversion to being alone for extended periods of time, especially in uncertain environments. Therefore, everything seems creepier to us when we are alone. Horror writer Stephen King was once asked after a lecture that I attended in 1979 if he believed in ghosts and the other paranormal things that he wrote about. He responded “no,” but then quickly added that when he “was alone, late at night, yes, always.” The tendency of isolation to amplify creepiness is forcefully driven home in the 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p5.66
“was alone, late at night, yes, always.” The tendency of isolation to amplify creepiness is forcefully driven home in the film Shut In Naomi Watts plays a widowed child psychologist who lives in isolation in rural New England with her son, who is comatose and bedridden as the result of an automobile accident. Snowed in and withdrawn from the outside world, Watts’ character descends into a desperate existence. It soon becomes difficult for her to distinguish the phantasms of her imagination from the reality of the creepy goings on in her apparently haunted house. Shut In, of course, is not 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p5.81
imagination from the reality of the creepy goings on in her apparently haunted house. Shut In, of course, is not the first movie to use isolation as a vehicle for madness . The characters played by Jack Nicholson in The Shining and Tom Hanks in Cast Away found themselves in similar predicaments. Although movies like Shut In are fictional, the toll on the protagonist’s psyche from being so alone for so long is based on the science of social isolation. When we are alone in an unusual environment, the way in which we process sensory information can change . For 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p5.97
When we are alone in an unusual environment, the way in which we process sensory information can change . For example, we normally spend most of our time attending to and processing external stimuli from the physical world around us. However, monotonous or tedious stimulation from our surroundings may cause us to turn our attention inward—within ourselves—which most of us have much less experience handling. This may lead us to lose confidence in our understanding of what’s going on in our surroundings; is that creaking sound upstairs just an old house pushing back against the wind, or is it something more 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p6.13
surroundings; is that creaking sound upstairs just an old house pushing back against the wind, or is it something more sinister? When we’re uncertain, the first thing we usually do is to look to the reactions of others to figure out what is going on. Without others with whom to share information and reactions, ambiguity becomes very hard to resolve. When this happens, our mind may quickly race to the darkest possible conclusions. Hence, it is no accident that the prototypical Hollywood haunted house is in a remote, isolated location, far removed from the rest of society (think of the 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p6.28
prototypical Hollywood haunted house is in a remote, isolated location, far removed from the rest of society (think of the off season resort hotel in The Shining, for example). If bad things do happen, help would be a long time coming, even if communication with the outside world were possible. And conveniently, in old horror movies the telephones always stop working. Isolation in natural environments such as the woods in The Blair Witch Project provides the same enforced helplessness that is so often a prerequisite for horror Let us consider the architecture of a haunted house as a classic example 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p6.44
is so often a prerequisite for horror Let us consider the architecture of a haunted house as a classic example of a place that creeps us out because it lacks the reassuring psychological features that we crave. Why Haunted Houses Creep Us Out The haunted house is a time honored horror setting, and it is not only at the movies that we pay good money to be frightened by them; commercial haunted houses are an integral part of twenty first century Halloween theatre, with an estimated 5,000 such attractions operating in the United States each year . While it is 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p6.59
century Halloween theatre, with an estimated 5,000 such attractions operating in the United States each year . While it is true that commercial haunted houses are not “real” haunted houses but rather “scare attractions” that have been artificially engineered to scare us, their design has been inspired by the familiar tropes of horror films as well as by the features associated with the legends surrounding houses reputedly haunted by actual spirits. Thus, I will use the term “haunted house” to refer to both. The discussion of haunted houses below, however, will focus on “real” haunted houses rather than scare attractions. The 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p6.75
to both. The discussion of haunted houses below, however, will focus on “real” haunted houses rather than scare attractions. The cinematic portrayal of haunted houses has remained remarkably consistent across time, and the architects of our annual Halloween spook houses incorporate all of the same bells and whistles (okay— creaks and groans) that we’ve come to expect. From a psychological point of view, the standard features of haunted houses creep us out because they exploit evolved psychological mechanisms that warn us of potential danger and motivate us to proceed with caution. Houses that send signals of being haunted give us 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p6.91
us of potential danger and motivate us to proceed with caution. Houses that send signals of being haunted give us the creeps not because they pose a clear threat to us, but rather because it is unclear whether or not they represent a threat. Thus, we become momentarily paralyzed as we sharply focus our attention to determine if there is indeed a real danger awaiting us there. This is the psychology behind feeling “creeped out,” and it is a reaction that may be useful if it helps you maintain vigilance when threat is uncertain . The agent detection mechanisms discussed 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p7.05
that may be useful if it helps you maintain vigilance when threat is uncertain . The agent detection mechanisms discussed earlier are on full alert in the standard haunted house, and for good reason. Things that activate hypervigilance for malevolent forces (whether natural or supernatural) abound in large, drafty old houses: rattling or creaking sounds in upstairs rooms; the sighing and moaning of wind passing through cracks; ragged curtains fluttering in the breeze; echoes; and cold spots. Consequently, it is very easy to imagine that one is not really alone in such a place. The horror and haunted house researcher 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p7.18
very easy to imagine that one is not really alone in such a place. The horror and haunted house researcher Margee Kerr notes that large old buildings full of rotting wood, exposed ductwork, and other structural defects can produce infrasound and make what is already a creepy experience even spookier. This is because of a phenomenon known as “the Hum,” which can be produced by a variety of things in the physical world, including drafty old buildings. In a nutshell, the “Hum” is a sensation that is caused by exposure to low frequency sounds of 20 hertz or less. These sound 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p7.32
“Hum” is a sensation that is caused by exposure to low frequency sounds of 20 hertz or less. These sound waves, known as “infrasound,” are inaudible to humans but their slight vibrations may still register as an unidentifiable, ambiguous signal that can set off our creep detectors. In some people, the “Hum” can produce sleeplessness and even nausea. Two British scientists conducted an experiment on the Hum at a concert in London in 2003 . In this experiment, they exposed an unsuspecting crowd to infrasound through loudspeakers, resulting in widespread reports of uneasiness and chills from the concertgoers, and scientists 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p7.45
an unsuspecting crowd to infrasound through loudspeakers, resulting in widespread reports of uneasiness and chills from the concertgoers, and scientists have found the same effects under controlled laboratory conditions . On top of the creepy sounds that set off agency detectors and dread producing infrasound, haunted houses also tend to limit our opportunities for escape. Research has consistently shown that we need more personal space while seated than while standing, more space when we are in the corner of a room rather than in the center of it, and more space in rooms with low ceilings . We feel uncomfortable 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p7.58
room rather than in the center of it, and more space in rooms with low ceilings . We feel uncomfortable when our personal space is violated anywhere, but especially so in situations where we feel as if escape will become difficult. Such feelings of discomfort are symptomatic of the fact that we are constantly—even if unconsciously—scanning our surroundings and assessing our ability to flee if it should become necessary. Consequently, the typical Hollywood haunted house is our worst nightmare as it makes fleeing difficult. The darkness and confusing layout of the house may cause us to get lost; at the 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p7.72
it makes fleeing difficult. The darkness and confusing layout of the house may cause us to get lost; at the very least, it would slow us down. Escape could further be impeded by hedges, iron fences, or crumbling stairways—all of which feature prominently in haunted houses in movies. Unfortunately, haunted houses also lack “legibility;” most haunted houses make for the bad combination of very low prospect for us, and very high refuge for the creepy crawly things that are lying in wait to get us. The typical haunted house is large, dark, surrounded by overgrown vegetation, and full of surprising architectural 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p7.85
wait to get us. The typical haunted house is large, dark, surrounded by overgrown vegetation, and full of surprising architectural features such as secret rooms and closets under staircases. Attics and basements are also must have items, and, of course, spider webs, bats, rats and insects make nice accessories. One of the most famous real life haunted houses possesses the aforementioned characteristics in spades. The Winchester Mystery House in San Jose, California is reputed to be the most haunted house in the world and it allegedly houses more than one thousand different ghosts. This house was the inspiration for the 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p7.99
in the world and it allegedly houses more than one thousand different ghosts. This house was the inspiration for the movie Winchester , starring Helen Mirren. This house was originally the home of Sarah Winchester, who was the widow of William Wirt Winchester, the gunmanufacturing magnate. Construction of the house began in 1884, completely unguided by any sort of coherent building plan, and it continued unabated until 1922. At least part of the construction was driven by the need to repair extensive damage from the 1906 San Francisco earthquake. Rooms, whimsical architectural features, and different wings and floors were added 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p8.14
repair extensive damage from the 1906 San Francisco earthquake. Rooms, whimsical architectural features, and different wings and floors were added haphazardly, resulting in a rambling, bizarre puzzle of secret passageways, stairways and doors that do not go anywhere, and windows with views into other interior rooms. There is even a room constructed specifically for conducting séances. At its peak, the house had over 500 rooms, more than 10,000 windows, and many dozens of fireplaces and stairways. In short, the Winchester Mystery House is the epitome of illegibility, and it is not surprising that ghosts took up residence there in very 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p8.29
Mystery House is the epitome of illegibility, and it is not surprising that ghosts took up residence there in very short order. A recent study reveals another reason why dark foreboding places come across as less than hospitable to us. In a series of seven experiments, Gray and his colleagues discovered that people most easily imagine extremely moral good people and extremely immoral evil people as having an afterlife, but the types of afterlives they experience are quite different. Specifically, good people are pictured in “transcendent immortality,” inhabiting a spiritual paradise such as heaven, or if their spirits remain on Earth, 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p8.45
people are pictured in “transcendent immortality,” inhabiting a spiritual paradise such as heaven, or if their spirits remain on Earth, as inhabiting expansive, open places such as mountaintops and deserts. The malevolent spirits of deceased evil doers, on the other hand, are most easily conceptualized in a “trapped immortality” where they exist in highly circumscribed surroundings such as a particularly dense forest, a haunted house, or even a single room. Given these new data, it is not at all surprising that spiritual presences that we encounter in old houses and other settings that lack legibility scare us rather than comfort 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p8.6
that spiritual presences that we encounter in old houses and other settings that lack legibility scare us rather than comfort us. In summary, haunted houses provide a treasure trove of things that set off our evolved agent detection mechanisms, and our reactions to them are shadows of how our prehistoric ancestors managed the uncertainty of danger in their own world. As powerful as architecture alone may be in creating a creepy setting, other features can interact with it in ways that magnify its impact. Specifically, the age of a place, and its association with death or troubled past events can 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p8.76
that magnify its impact. Specifically, the age of a place, and its association with death or troubled past events can prime us to resolve ambiguity in ways that are guaranteed to creep us out. The Older the Place, the More Likely it is to Feel Haunted Why should a place that is old, especially if it has a sordid history, be more likely to creep us out? The answer to this question seems quite simple. If a place has demonstrated a past proclivity for providing unfortunate outcomes for those who have visited it, we take that as a warning and 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p8.91
a past proclivity for providing unfortunate outcomes for those who have visited it, we take that as a warning and resolve ambiguous feelings about the place by moving in the direction of caution. One of the main reasons why we think that older places are more likely to be haunted is simply because there has been much more time for tragic things to have taken place. Thus, stimuli such as moldy odors, antiquated Victorian or Gothic architecture, wood interiors and old portraits on the wall reinforce an ambiance of great age and make a place seem creepier. Most haunted houses have 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p9.06
portraits on the wall reinforce an ambiance of great age and make a place seem creepier. Most haunted houses have some sort of “legend” associated with them. It usually involves a story about a macabre death or accident. There may even be a history of suicide and murder, as in the famous house in Fall River, Massachusetts where Lizzie Borden allegedly murdered both of her parents with an ax. A less well known ax murder house is located in the small town of Villisca, Iowa. In June of 1912, eight people (including six children) were murdered with an ax, and 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p9.19
small town of Villisca, Iowa. In June of 1912, eight people (including six children) were murdered with an ax, and the crime was never solved. The house still stands, and it is widely believed by the locals to be haunted by the ghosts of the children who can be heard laughing, crying, and warning each other to hide. Assuming that the house is no longer occupied, signs of life suddenly interrupted and frozen in time only amplify the fear factor; remnants of a half eaten meal on a kitchen table or clothing laid out on a bed waiting for a 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p9.32
remnants of a half eaten meal on a kitchen table or clothing laid out on a bed waiting for a homeowner who has apparently vanished without warning create a frightening ambiguity about what may have taken place in the house. For example, in Belgium there is an abandoned estate, and it is clear that its residents fled in quite a hurry because many valuable items of furniture dinnerware, artwork, and other personal artifacts were left behind. What makes this seem all the creepier is the fact that after decades of being empty and unattended, no one has looted the place 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p9.46
all the creepier is the fact that after decades of being empty and unattended, no one has looted the place and there is little evidence that very many have even explored it . Similarly, the abandoned city of Pripyat in the Ukraine has become the poster child for the creepiness of life frozen in time. This city of 50,000 people was evacuated very quickly following the Chernobyl nuclear accident in 1986 and its residents were never allowed to return. All of the clocks in the city are frozen in time at 11:55 and the trappings of interrupted everyday life are everywhere 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p9.59
the clocks in the city are frozen in time at 11:55 and the trappings of interrupted everyday life are everywhere to be seen: toys and schoolbooks lie where they were dropped long ago by children who are now middle aged people; amusement park rides are seemingly stopped in mid ride; kitchens are full of unwashed dishes. The city is slowly being reclaimed by the surrounding forest and wildlife, and it will eventually be completely unrecognizable as the vibrant place that it once was. While the empty Belgian estate and the city of Pripyat are not actually all that old, their 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p9.72
it once was. While the empty Belgian estate and the city of Pripyat are not actually all that old, their abandonment and decay convey a sense of the passage of time that confers an aura of creepiness upon them that other locations of similar age do not possess. Thus, we are more on our guard in settings with ambiguous or even sordid pasts because our agent detection mechanisms are fully engaged when we are there. Institutions that Once Housed Troubled Populations are Especially Likely to Seem Haunted Sociologist Margee Kerr has noted that places that isolate people without their consent 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p9.86
Populations are Especially Likely to Seem Haunted Sociologist Margee Kerr has noted that places that isolate people without their consent such as prisons and insane asylums are often considered scary. I would take this one step further and propose that any institution that once housed any “troubled” population of people may become “contaminated” by this association in the minds of imaginative individuals and thereby be believed to more likely to visit trouble upon visitors who dare to explore such places. Again, our brains take advantage of any information that will guide us to a conclusion about the costs or benefits 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p9.99
Again, our brains take advantage of any information that will guide us to a conclusion about the costs or benefits associated with spending time in a place, and such places are very strongly associated with bad stuff. So, it is not surprising to find that prisons, orphanages, and hospitals are ubiquitous on virtually every list of creepy places. Pennsylvania’s Eastern State Penitentiary is a famously creepy place. The prison opened in 1829 and it was one of the first places to experiment with a range of “rehabilitation” techniques such as solitary confinement. It is gigantic, dark, gloomy, and altogether foreboding. 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p10.13
to experiment with a range of “rehabilitation” techniques such as solitary confinement. It is gigantic, dark, gloomy, and altogether foreboding. In its day, it housed some of the most violent and troubled people in the country. According to Kerr, it has become the most popular American haunted attraction outside of an amusement park, and it runs an annual spooky event known as “Terror Behind the Walls.” Other old U.S. prisons, notably the old West Virginia State Penitentiary, have also reopened for business as haunted houses. Similarly, abandoned orphanages and hospitals (especially mental hospitals) are often thought to be inhabited by the 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p10.27
business as haunted houses. Similarly, abandoned orphanages and hospitals (especially mental hospitals) are often thought to be inhabited by the suffering ghosts of the tortured souls who once walked their corridors. One of the best known of these is the Pennhurst Asylum in Pennsylvania. In short, the history of a place provides information that helps us resolve ambiguity about the nature of the emotions that we should experience there, and the places described above have never been happy places. Places Associated with Death are Automatically Creepy to Us Death is inherently creepy to us because of its ambiguity, and ambiguity 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p10.41
Associated with Death are Automatically Creepy to Us Death is inherently creepy to us because of its ambiguity, and ambiguity is the soil in which horror grows. Very few people know exactly when or how they will die, let alone what happens to them after their death, and religion has been the traditional vehicle for allaying our fears and resolving the uncertainty surrounding death . And since there was no evolutionary payoff for being able to think of one’s self as being dead, we never developed the mental machinery that would make such thinking easy. Hence, the mere act of 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p10.55
as being dead, we never developed the mental machinery that would make such thinking easy. Hence, the mere act of contemplating death is fraught with confusion and uncertainty, adding to its creepy mystique. By priming thoughts of death, places defined by death quite naturally cause us to become aware of our own mortality, which may inspire a sense of urgency in our agent detectors. The old expression “whistling past the graveyard” reflects the longstanding unease that humans have around places associated with death. Therefore, it should not be surprising to discover that places that have been the scene of a 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p10.69
associated with death. Therefore, it should not be surprising to discover that places that have been the scene of a death frequently become haunted places, and these locations are common settings for horror movies and books. The more gruesome and traumatic a death, the more likely it is that the place where it happened becomes tainted by the event. Locations that were the scene of executions, such as the places in town squares where gallows were built or where beheadings occurred, are often linked with ghost stories, as are battlefields and mines where men have traditionally died violent deaths. In early 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p10.83
are often linked with ghost stories, as are battlefields and mines where men have traditionally died violent deaths. In early twentieth century England, it was widely believed that the spirits of miners who had been killed in previous mine disasters suddenly appeared to warn miners about an impending collapse of the walls around them . In some mines, the legend was passed down with the twist that it was the ghosts of the children of dead miners who delivered the bad news. In almost every mine, beliefs about the ghosts of miners killed in accidents haunting the very spot where 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p10.97
bad news. In almost every mine, beliefs about the ghosts of miners killed in accidents haunting the very spot where they had died were common . College and university campuses where dramatic deaths have occurred are often thought of as haunted, perhaps because deaths that occur in such a young population are by definition unexpected and traumatic. Many, if not most, colleges have at least one resident ghost. Kenyon College in Ohio has a reputation for having one of the most haunted campuses in America. In fact, the place is so full of spirits that the main gates to the 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p11.1
most haunted campuses in America. In fact, the place is so full of spirits that the main gates to the campus have come to be known as the “Gates of Hell.” An inordinate number of students have died in tragic and unusual ways in the history of the college , and their ghosts haunt the place by rearranging furniture, turning lights on and off, flushing toilets in empty bathrooms, and creating wet footprints in a dance hall that used to be a swimming pool. Other ghosts unscrew light bulbs and jog around the track at night. The most tragic event 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p11.22
be a swimming pool. Other ghosts unscrew light bulbs and jog around the track at night. The most tragic event was a dormitory fire in 1949 that claimed the lives of nine students, and the spirits of the fire victims have reportedly been seen in the halls of the now restored building, visible only from the knees up because the foundation of the rebuilt dorm is roughly ten inches higher than the old one. Suicides can score extra horror points for the places in which they occur, but the mere occurrence of a suicide does not seem to be enough in 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p11.34
the places in which they occur, but the mere occurrence of a suicide does not seem to be enough in and of itself to make a place seem dreadful—the site must possess additional qualities to bestow true creepiness upon the locale. For example, the number one suicide destination in the world is the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco, but in spite of the estimated 2,000 suicides that have occurred there since the bridge opened in 1937, most people do not think of the bridge as a creepy place. In the universe of suicide destinations, the clear frontrunner for the 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p11.47
not think of the bridge as a creepy place. In the universe of suicide destinations, the clear frontrunner for the title of creepiest suicide venue is the infamous “Suicide Forest” in Japan. The Aokigahara Jukai forest is a beautiful, dense, fourteen square mile patch of vegetation near Mount Fuji, Japan’s sacred mountain. It provided the inspiration for the 2016 horror film The Forest The place has long been associated with mystical and supernatural phenomena, and in the 1800s it was a popular destination for abandoning elderly people so they could die alone and with dignity in the woods. In fact, 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p11.59
a popular destination for abandoning elderly people so they could die alone and with dignity in the woods. In fact, it is described in a book with the somber title The Complete Manual of Suicide as “the perfect place to die,” and copies of this book have been found on the bodies of many suicide victims in the forest. In spite of its long association with death, it is primarily since it was used by a Japanese novelist in the 1960s as the setting for a story about two lovers who end up killing themselves that it has come to 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p11.71
1960s as the setting for a story about two lovers who end up killing themselves that it has come to be known as a suicide haven. Suicides are so common there that the area is regularly patrolled by police and teams of volunteers who seek to save people from themselves or to at least recover the bodies of those whom they could not save. Signs with messages such as “Please consult the police before you decide to die” and “Your life is a precious gift from your parents” are posted throughout the forest in an attempt to deter individuals who may 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p11.84
is a precious gift from your parents” are posted throughout the forest in an attempt to deter individuals who may be wavering in their resolve. Some individuals prowl the forest looking for the bodies of the dead so that they might rob them of any valuables that may still be in their possession. Unlike the Golden Gate Bridge, the forest has all of the trappings essential for being creepy. It full of densely packed trees, rotting logs, moss and underbrush, and the lack of legibility in the forest is exacerbated by the fact that compasses do not work there because 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p11.96
and the lack of legibility in the forest is exacerbated by the fact that compasses do not work there because of the high concentration of magnetic iron in the rocky volcanic soil. Folklore has it that the spirits of people who have killed themselves in the forest call others to the place and then prey upon those who are sad by luring them off of the trails, deep into the woods. Cemeteries and burial grounds in general quickly come to mind when one is asked to think of creepy places. There are, of course, many stories of cemetery ghosts such 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p12.1
mind when one is asked to think of creepy places. There are, of course, many stories of cemetery ghosts such as the woman who haunts an old cemetery in Alexandria, Virginia. In 1816, a young woman visited the town with her husband. Her face was completely covered with a veil, and no one had a chance to meet her or see her face before she was overcome by a mysterious illness that killed her. The medical staff that treated her agreed to keep her identity confidential, and the husband buried her in the local cemetery all by himself. Consequently, no 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p12.25
agreed to keep her identity confidential, and the husband buried her in the local cemetery all by himself. Consequently, no one ever found out who she was. Her veiled figure has reportedly been seen wandering through the cemetery ever since. The one thing that seems to really rile up the ghosts in a graveyard is the desecration or disturbing of graves where the dead have finally gotten comfortable. In Owen Davies’ history of English ghosts, a disruption of burial plots by construction projects or body snatching invariably leads to an increase in strange paranormal activity around the graveyard. This, of course, 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p12.39
construction projects or body snatching invariably leads to an increase in strange paranormal activity around the graveyard. This, of course, was the premise of the very scary Poltergeist horror movie series. In the original film, an unsuspecting suburban family purchases a home from a greedy land developer who has built new homes on top of a sacred Indian burial ground. The spirits of the dead communicate with the youngest child in the family via the television set and eventually kidnap her by dragging her through a portal in her bedroom closet into the spirit world. Again, it was the disruption 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p12.54
her by dragging her through a portal in her bedroom closet into the spirit world. Again, it was the disruption of the resting dead rather than their mere proximity that led to all of the trouble. In summary, places associated with death prime us with thoughts of our own death, placing our agent detection systems on high alert. The Psychology Behind Why Stories of Haunted Houses and other Creepy Places Are Self Perpetuating So, why do beliefs in haunted places persist in the enlightened twenty first century? The answer to this question can be found in the way that humans 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p12.68
persist in the enlightened twenty first century? The answer to this question can be found in the way that humans process and remember information. It seems as if everyone likes a good haunted house story, and a belief in the veracity of these tales often persists long after the facts of the case reveal them to be little more than a legend. Part of the problem is that once an individual believes that haunted houses are real, even well intentioned individuals may hoodwink themselves into experiences that genuinely creep them out. In the words of sociologist Christopher Bader, “The first 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p12.83
individuals may hoodwink themselves into experiences that genuinely creep them out. In the words of sociologist Christopher Bader, “The first requirement for there being a ghost in the house is someone believing there’s a ghost in the house” . Our proclivity for falling into this trap is intimately related to how we have evolved to process sensory input from our environment. Evolutionary success required the development of perceptual systems that accurately reflect what is in our immediate environment, especially when it comes to detecting predators and other dangers. Both speed and accuracy in assessing what is out there are important; however, 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p12.97
comes to detecting predators and other dangers. Both speed and accuracy in assessing what is out there are important; however, perception is of necessity a trade off between speed and accuracy. Our cognitive processing system helps soften this necessary trade off by gambling a bit and quickly recognizing things that are likely to occur in a place, even if there are changes in perspective or we are forced to deal with very sketchy sensory information. For example, if you are driving along a highway and pass a farm, any large dark figure moving in the distance is likely to be 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p13.11
driving along a highway and pass a farm, any large dark figure moving in the distance is likely to be quickly recognized as a horse, a cow, or a pig, since these are the stimuli that would be “probable” in that environment. In these situations, the speed of recognition will usually not interfere with accuracy. This is called “top down processing” by cognitive psychologists who study pattern recognition , as the process is driven by expectations about which objects are likely to be found in a particular setting. In other words, topdown processing causes us to seek specific perceptions before 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p13.25
likely to be found in a particular setting. In other words, topdown processing causes us to seek specific perceptions before we receive any sensory information at all. Top down processing combined with the agent detection mechanisms discussed earlier may explain the tendency to perceive ghosts and other paranormal activity in places that we already believe to be haunted. A fascinating case study of just such a situation has been described by paranormal investigator Benjamin Radford , who was contacted by a terrified woman near Buffalo, New York, in November of 2003. She was completely convinced that her house was haunted 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p13.39
a terrified woman near Buffalo, New York, in November of 2003. She was completely convinced that her house was haunted by ghosts or at least by some sort of evil spirit. She and her husband were contemplating moving because they could no longer stand the tension of living in a haunted house. They had been in the house about three years, and over time they saw an increase in what they believed to be paranormal activity, such as strange noises, sights, and sensations. The couple even summoned a priest to bless their house, but the haunting continued to get worse. Radford, 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p13.53
and sensations. The couple even summoned a priest to bless their house, but the haunting continued to get worse. Radford, who worked for the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal in Amherst, New York, agreed to look into the case. He found the husband and wife to be normal, sincere people who were thoroughly frightened and creeped out by what was going on in their home. After a few weeks of experimentation and investigation, he discovered that the couple had inadvertently, but quite literally, haunted their own house. They fed each other’s fears by engaging in 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p13.67
that the couple had inadvertently, but quite literally, haunted their own house. They fed each other’s fears by engaging in self confirming top down processing guided by expectations. Once they believed that their house was haunted, any ambiguity that they experienced was resolved in the direction that was dictated by their fears, which in this case meant that there were ghosts running wild in the house. Conclusion In summary, the scientific work discussed in this paper suggests that the plots and props of contemporary horror fiction and film are securely anchored to the parts of our unconscious that we have 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p13.81
and props of contemporary horror fiction and film are securely anchored to the parts of our unconscious that we have inherited from our prehistoric ancestors. McAndrew and Koehnke proposed that our reactions to “creepy people” are based upon ambiguity and our lack of confidence about being able to read their intentions; it appears that this theoretical framework might work equally well in helping us understand our reactions to creepy places. I have no concern that a deeper understanding of the inner workings of creepiness might undermine our ability to enjoy horror in fiction, film, and scare attractions, since the stimuli 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p13.95
inner workings of creepiness might undermine our ability to enjoy horror in fiction, film, and scare attractions, since the stimuli that trigger our reactions by pass (for the most part) the conscious, deliberative part of our cognitive selves where such knowledge resides. So, introducing an air of uncertainty into an antiquarian environment where terrible things have happened before (and may happen again) will always place us on our highest alert, and when combined with hazards that have threatened humans from the dawn of time, will creep us out every time. 	Psych, Geo, and Architecture of Horror:  p14.35
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) with weak (micro Tesla) complex waveform fields have been claimed to evoke the sensed presence of a sentient being in up to 80% in the general population. These findings have had a questionable neurophysiological foundation as the fields are approximately six orders of magnitude weaker than ordinary TMS fields. Also, no independent replication has been reported. To replicate and extend previous findings, we performed a double blind experiment , with a sham field control group. Personality characteristics indicating suggestibility (absorption, signs of abnormal temporal lobe activity, and a “new age” life style orientation) were used as predictors. Sensed presence, mystical, and other somatosensory experiences previously reported from the magnetic field stimulation were outcome measures. 	Sensed presence and mystical experiences :  p0
used as predictors. Sensed presence, mystical, and other somatosensory experiences previously reported from the magnetic field stimulation were outcome measures. We found no evidence for any effects of the magnetic fields, neither in the entire group, nor in individuals high in suggestibility. Because the personality characteristics significantly predicted outcomes, suggestibility may account for previously reported effects. Our results strongly question the earlier claims of experiential effects of weak magnetic fields. We are grateful to Stanley Koren and Dr. Persinger for generously providing their magnetic field device, and instructing us in its use. We thank Lars Erik Larsson for technological assistance. P.G. is supported by a Sasakawa Young Leaders’ post doctoral fellowship, and M.F. by the Swedish Research Council. 	Sensed presence and mystical experiences :  p0.46
Often it is difficult to find a natural explanation as to why a surprising coincidence occurs. In attempting to find one, people may be inclined to accept paranormal explanations. The objective of this study was to investigate whether people with a lower threshold for being surprised by coincidences have a greater propensity to become believers compared to those with a higher threshold. Participants were exposed to artificial coincidences, which were formally defined as less or more probable, and were asked to provide remarkability ratings. Paranormal belief was measured by the Australian Sheep Goat Scale. An analysis of the remarkability ratings revealed a significant interaction effect between Sheep Goat score and type of coincidence, suggesting that people with lower thresholds of surprise, when experiencing coincidences, harbor higher paranormal belief than those with a higher threshold. The theoretical aspects of these findings were discussed. 	Sensitivity to coincidences and paranormal belief :  p0.01
The Stone Tape Theory is the speculation that ghosts and hauntings are analogous to tape recordings: that mental impressions during emotional or traumatic events can be projected in the form of energy, "recorded" onto rocks (and other items) and "replayed" under certain conditions. The idea draws inspiration from and shares similarities with views of 19th century intellectualists and psychic researchers, such as Charles Babbage, Eleonor Sidgwick and Edmund Gurney. Contemporarily, the concept was popularized by a 1972 Christmas ghost story called The Stone Tape, produced by the BBC.[1][2] Following the play\'s popularity, the idea and the term "stone tape" 	Stone Tape Theory :  p0
story called The Stone Tape, produced by the BBC.[1][2] Following the play\'s popularity, the idea and the term "stone tape" were retrospectively and inaccurately attributed to the British archaeologist turned parapsychologist T. C. Lethbridge, who believed that ghosts were not spirits of the deceased, but were simply non interactive recordings similar to a movie. History The idea that environmental elements are capable of storing traces of human thoughts or emotions was introduced by multiple 19th century scholars and philosophers as an attempt to provide natural explanations for supernatural phenomena. In 1837 the polymath Charles Babbage published a work on natural theology called the Ninth Bridgewater Treatise. Babbage speculated that 	Stone Tape Theory :  p0.13
In 1837 the polymath Charles Babbage published a work on natural theology called the Ninth Bridgewater Treatise. Babbage speculated that spoken words leave permanent impressions in the air, even though they become inaudible after a time. He suggested that it is possible due to transfer of motion between particles.[3] The "Stone tape theory" could also be derived from the concept of "place memory". In the early days of the Society for Psychical Research, place memory was considered an explanation for ghostly apparitions seemingly connected with certain places. In the late 19th century, two of the Society for Psychical Research involved investigators, Edmund Gurney and Eleonor Sidgwick, presented views about 	Stone Tape Theory :  p0.27
late 19th century, two of the Society for Psychical Research involved investigators, Edmund Gurney and Eleonor Sidgwick, presented views about certain buildings or materials being capable of storing records of past events, which can be later played back by gifted individuals.[3] Another 19th century idea associated with the "Stone Tape Theory" is psychometry: a belief that it is possible to obtain knowledge about the history associated with an object through physical contact with it.[3] In the 20th century, the idea that objects are able to store and play back past events was re introduced in 1939 and 1940 by then Society for Psychical Research president H. H. Price. Price 	Stone Tape Theory :  p0.41
past events was re introduced in 1939 and 1940 by then Society for Psychical Research president H. H. Price. Price speculated about "psychic ether" as an intermediate medium between spiritual and physical reality, enabling objects to carry memory traces of emotions or experiences from the past. In his works, he stated that the existence of such traces should be proveable by means of scientific methods and yet they remain unproven hypotheses.[3] Following Price\'s ideas, an archeologist turned paranormal researcher, T. C. Lethbridge, claimed that past events can be stored in objects thanks to fields of energy, which he believed to surround streams, forests or mountains. His 1961 book Ghost 	Stone Tape Theory :  p0.56
in objects thanks to fields of energy, which he believed to surround streams, forests or mountains. His 1961 book Ghost and Ghoul popularized these ideas, which allegedly inspired the creators of the 1972 BBC play The Stone Tape.[3] Reception In their book How to Think About Weird Things: Critical Thinking for a New Age, authors Theodore Schick and Lewis Vaughn dismissed the idea as an irrational claim, stating, "The problem is that we know of no mechanism that could record such information in a stone or play it back. Chunks of stone just do not have the same properties as reels of tape."[2] Sharon Hill, science educator and geologist, 	Stone Tape Theory :  p0.7
Chunks of stone just do not have the same properties as reels of tape."[2] Sharon Hill, science educator and geologist, claims that "stone tape theory" is a misleading term, as it suggests to encompass structure, credibility and explanatory power or scientific theory, while in reality it is speculation that lacks physical basis. According to her, it is an attempt to present a pseudoscientific claim in a seemingly scientific style.[3][4] Hill also suspects that the "kernel of the idea of stone tape" is psychometry,[3] which is criticized for being a form of cold reading rather than an unexplained supernatural phenomenon.[5][6] 	Stone Tape Theory :  p0.84
Transliminality is ‘‘a hypothesized tendency for psychological material to cross thresholds into or out of consciousness,’’ which has been proposed to derive from hyperconnectivity between temporal limbic structures and sensory association cortices. Accordingly, it might be expected that transliminality would positively correlate with temporal lobe lability. To test this hypothesis, 135 undergraduate psychology students at an Australian and a British university completed the Revised Transliminality Scale and the Personal Philosophy Inventory , a validated measure of temporal lobe lability. As predicted, scores on transliminality showed a strong association with the general temporal 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1964
a validated measure of temporal lobe lability. As predicted, scores on transliminality showed a strong association with the general temporal lobe scale , as well as moderate correlations with a number of other scalar variables and individual items. The findings are consistent with the idea that transliminality is related to more ungated processing related to temporal lobe functioning, and furthermore that temporal lobe phenomenology promotes transliminal experiences with mystical or religious overtones. # 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Keywords: Transliminality; Personal Philosophy Inventory; Temporal lobe lability 1. Introduction The concept of transliminality was previously described in this journal as ‘‘. . 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1964.33
Philosophy Inventory; Temporal lobe lability 1. Introduction The concept of transliminality was previously described in this journal as ‘‘. . .a hypothesised tendency for psychological material to cross (trans) thresholds (limines) into or out of consciousness’’ . This definition derives from the finding of a single dimension that underlies seven psychological variables: magical ideation, mystical experience, absorption, hyperesthesia, manic experience, dream interpretation, and fantasy proneness. As a result, the phrase ‘‘psychological material’’ is intended to cover a wide range of imagery, ideation, affect and perception. At first this psychological material was thought to flow from the subliminal to the supraliminal consciousness , 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1964.7
affect and perception. At first this psychological material was thought to flow from the subliminal to the supraliminal consciousness , but later research suggested a flow in the opposite direction and even from the external environment to the supraliminal consciousness . Thus, the concept of transliminality as a consciousness variable is a very broad one. Interested readers are referred to Thalbourne for a comprehensive review of the previous research on transliminality, but since that review a good deal of research has been published. Therefore, we review some of this literature next since the progression of the recent studies on transliminality nicely illustrates 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1965.03
published. Therefore, we review some of this literature next since the progression of the recent studies on transliminality nicely illustrates the rationale for expecting a positive relationship between transliminality and temporal lobe lability. One of the most important pieces of research on the transliminality construct was published in Consciousness and Cognition by Lange, Thalbourne, Houran, and Storm . The 29 item true/ false Transliminality Scale was subjected to a process of ‘‘top down purification.’’ This procedure involves Rasch scaling , combined with tests for dimensionality , and the removal of biased items in an iterative fashion. In other words, the top down 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1965.19
tests for dimensionality , and the removal of biased items in an iterative fashion. In other words, the top down purification approach aims to create a reliable and undimensional interval measure of a latent variable that has a known fit to the Rasch model and clearly defined scaling properties . The result is that the original 29 item scale is administered to provide context, but only 17 items are scored and subsequently converted into a Rasch scaled score with a mean of 25 . The following studies are mostly based on this new 17 item Revised Transliminality Scale, which is being increasingly 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1965.34
25 . The following studies are mostly based on this new 17 item Revised Transliminality Scale, which is being increasingly used in research and should be the only scoring scheme used in future work due to its psychometric superiority. The Transliminality Scale shows particularly strong correlations with paranormal belief and paranormal experience variables . Houran and Thalbourne used two scales derived from the work of Kumar and Pekala the ‘‘Encounters’’ subscale, which deals with alleged encounters with beings and entities such as angels, the dead, and UFOs; the ‘‘Poltergeist’’ subscale, whose items deal with general phenomena associated with hauntings and poltergeists; and 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1965.5
angels, the dead, and UFOs; the ‘‘Poltergeist’’ subscale, whose items deal with general phenomena associated with hauntings and poltergeists; and a single item on apparitions. For a first year student sample the Revised Transliminality Scale correlated 0.61 with the Encounters subscale, 0.51 with the Poltergeist subscale, and 0.38 with seeing a ghost, all significant at P<0.001. In that article a psychophysiological explanation of transliminality was adumbrated (and modified to a state trait construct where transliminality is thought to be mediated by intense This initial psychophysiological description of transliminality identified the limbic system as providing source material for phenomena such as apparitional and visionary 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1965.66
initial psychophysiological description of transliminality identified the limbic system as providing source material for phenomena such as apparitional and visionary experiences. This proposal strongly paralleled Persinger’s longstanding hypothesis that experiences of sensed presences, apparitions, and mystical experiences stem from temporal lobe functioning . Thalbourne, Houran, Alias, and Brugger expanded upon the suggestions by Houran and Thalbourne and speculated that a much greater degree of ‘‘interconnectedness’’ or ‘‘fluidity’’ was present in the brains of highly transliminal persons. Specifically, the items that comprised the Revised Transliminality Scale suggested a hyperconnectivity between temporallimbic structures and sensory association cortices. This view predicts that those with theoretically 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1965.82
Revised Transliminality Scale suggested a hyperconnectivity between temporallimbic structures and sensory association cortices. This view predicts that those with theoretically greater levels of transliminality will experience perceptual anomalies. For example, synæsthesia has been described as the situation where ‘‘an inducing stimulus produces, at the same time, two kinds of sensory response: the primary sensory experience that is normally associated with that stimulus and, anomalously, a secondary experience in another modality,’’ such as seeing a color in response to a sound . Likewise, Abraham noted that synæsthesia probably reflects heightened connectivity between adjacent cerebral regions. Therefore, synæsthesia is a theoretical consequence of enhanced 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1965.98
Abraham noted that synæsthesia probably reflects heightened connectivity between adjacent cerebral regions. Therefore, synæsthesia is a theoretical consequence of enhanced transliminality. Thalbourne et al. tested this hypothesis in two correlational studies. The first study involved 115 persons from the Australian general population who had taken part in the study of absorption . Transliminality was here measured by a factor score, and synæsthesia by Tellegen’s seven item scale. The Spearman rank correlation between scores on transliminality and synæsthesia was a highly significant 0.47. The second study used 242 psychology students who were administered the original Transliminality Scale . The rank order correlation between 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1966.13
The second study used 242 psychology students who were administered the original Transliminality Scale . The rank order correlation between scores on transliminality and synæsthesia was also a highly significant 0.57. Notwithstanding these results, profound synæsthesia is a rare condition Thus, a collaborative effort is in progress between researchers in Zu¨ rich and the United States in which a sample of extreme, laboratory validated synæsthetes will be compared to a control group on the Revised Transliminality Scale. There is stronger reason to believe that temporal lobe lability contributes to transliminality. Neppe noted that the temporal lobes, which constitute 40% of the cerebrum, 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1966.29
believe that temporal lobe lability contributes to transliminality. Neppe noted that the temporal lobes, which constitute 40% of the cerebrum, are well situated for their major physiologic function of integrating polymodal perceptual inputs of all kinds, including those from the. . .sense organs. For example, smell, balance, hearing, and taste are processed by temporolimbic structures; and vision,. . .touch, position sense, and pain by neighboring areas. In addition the temporal lobes are responsible for interpreting various aspects of affective, conative, and cognitive functions such as memory, learning, language interpretation, and sense of self. . .Thus, complex symptomatology results from firing within a 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1966.44
functions such as memory, learning, language interpretation, and sense of self. . .Thus, complex symptomatology results from firing within a temporal lobe or non functional atrophic lesions of parts of a temporal lobe. This may be further complicated by alterations in states of consciousness . If transliminality is an index of the degree of neurological interconnectedness, including more functional connections both within the temporal lobes and with other areas of the brain, then we should expect scores on transliminality to correlate with direct and indirect indicators of temporal lobe symptomatology. Michael Persinger has argued that such temporal lobe symptomatology accounts for a 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1966.6
direct and indirect indicators of temporal lobe symptomatology. Michael Persinger has argued that such temporal lobe symptomatology accounts for a wide range of experiences, most notably of the paranormal and religious and mystical experiences . He devised the Personal Philosophy Inventory to measure a postulated continuum of temporal lobe lability and its putative associated phenomena. As Neppe noted, ‘‘There are already construct validity [data] for Persinger’s temporal lobe scale; normal people who report more subjective experiences similar to those stated by patients whose deep temporal lobes are stimulated surgically show enhanced EEG lability within the temporal lobes but not the occipital lobes .’’ 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1966.76
deep temporal lobes are stimulated surgically show enhanced EEG lability within the temporal lobes but not the occipital lobes .’’ Accordingly, we predict that scores on the Revised Transliminality Scale correlate positively with measures of temporal lobe lability and with aspects of its symptomatology. We administered two measures in counterbalanced order. One instrument was the 29 item truefalse Transliminality Scale revised and scored according to Lange et al.’s Rasch scheme. In this implementation only 17 items are scored, which subsequently constitute a unidimensional scale with good reliability a KR and an interval scale of measurement. The other measure was the Personal Philosophy 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1966.92
unidimensional scale with good reliability a KR and an interval scale of measurement. The other measure was the Personal Philosophy Inventory . This Inventory is a true/false instrument containing 140 statements grouped into a large number of (sometimes overlapping) clusters measuring: a control for acquiescence response bias ; the tendency to lie ; paranormal experiences ; general temporal lobe epilepsy ; complex partial epileptic signs ; all signs involving temporal lobe like factors ; exotic beliefs ; fear ; egocentrism ; rare (psychotic like) statements ; perseveration ; limbicmotor statements ; automatic behaviours ; intense meaning ; hypergraphia, or writing ; visual 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1967.12
(psychotic like) statements ; perseveration ; limbicmotor statements ; automatic behaviours ; intense meaning ; hypergraphia, or writing ; visual imagery ; depersonalisation (4 items); auditory vestibular experiences ; sense of presence ; suggestibility ; olfactory experiences ; and hypomania . Note that all clusters were divided by the number of statements in them and multiplied by 100 so that the score of each participant could range from 0 to 100. 2.2. Descriptive statistics Table 1 shows the range of scores and the mean and standard deviation for each of the measures. Note that scores on the Rasch Transliminality Scale ranged right 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1967.37
the mean and standard deviation for each of the measures. Note that scores on the Rasch Transliminality Scale ranged right across the potential scoring range, and have, as expected, a mean of 25 and a standard deviation of 5. 2.3. Subjects and procedure Data derived from a convenience sample consisting of 135 undergraduate psychology students . Twenty of the participants came from Adelaide University (Australia) and 115 came from Goldsmiths College (UK). 3. Results 3.1. Correlational data for the clusters Pearson correlations (two tailed) were calculated between the Revised Transliminality Scale and all of the clusters in the Personal Philosophy Inventory. Seventeen 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1967.62
(two tailed) were calculated between the Revised Transliminality Scale and all of the clusters in the Personal Philosophy Inventory. Seventeen out of the resulting 23 correlations were statistically significant and in the predicted direction. Table 2 lists these significant correlations in order of magnitude. We should first note that transliminality correlated significantly though at a low level with acquiescence response bias and therefore an adjustment was made to two of the highest correlations, using the technique of partial correlation. The partial correlation for the correlation between transliminality and the general temporal lobe epilepsy scale decreased minimally from 0.72 to 0.70, while the 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1967.87
for the correlation between transliminality and the general temporal lobe epilepsy scale decreased minimally from 0.72 to 0.70, while the partial correlation between transliminality and all signs involving temporal lobe factors likewise showed a minor decrease from 0.70 to 0.68. These changes suggest that acquiescence response bias had a negligible effect on the relevant correlations. As predicted, scores on the Revised Transliminality Scale were positively and significantly correlated with the general temporal lobe epilepsy scale, number of complex partial epileptic signs (which is a part of the former), all signs involving temporal lobe factors, sense of presence, liberal (exotic) beliefs, depersonalisation, auditory 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1968.2
is a part of the former), all signs involving temporal lobe factors, sense of presence, liberal (exotic) beliefs, depersonalisation, auditory vestibular experiences, visual images, paranormal experiences, hypomania, intense meaning, olfactory experiences, perseveration, hypergraphia, rare (potentially psychotic like) features, limbic motor processes, acquiescence response bias, and conservative religious beliefs. However, scores on the Revised Transliminality Scale did not significantly correlate with the lie scale, fear or phobia, egocentrism, automatic behaviours or suggestibility. 3.2. Correlational data for the Personal Philosophy Inventory items There are 140 items in the Personal Philosophy Inventory, and in order to ascertain which of them were related to transliminality two tailed 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1968.63
items in the Personal Philosophy Inventory, and in order to ascertain which of them were related to transliminality two tailed Pearson correlations were computed between the Revised Transliminality Scale and each of the 140 items. Fifty five correlations were significant at the 0.05 level or less. To control for Type I error, attention was focused on those 28 correlations that were significant at the 0.001 level or better. The wording of the relevant items and their correlation coefficients are given in Table 3. A common theme appears amongst many if not most of the items in Table 3, which we tentatively identify 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1969.05
3. A common theme appears amongst many if not most of the items in Table 3, which we tentatively identify as ‘‘spirituality’’. Even the items concerning physical symptoms might be thought to be a part of the psychophysiological syndrome known in the East as ‘‘kundalini’’, which is another correlate of transliminality . Moreover, it is already known that transliminality is associated with non sectarian religiosity 4. Discussion The robust pattern of findings clearly supports our hypothesis that transliminality involves aspects of temporal lobe lability. In particular, scores on the Revised Transliminality Scale significantly correlated with 17 clusters and 55 single items from 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1969.43
lobe lability. In particular, scores on the Revised Transliminality Scale significantly correlated with 17 clusters and 55 single items from the Personal Philosophy Inventory. Of the clusters, highly transliminal participants tended to experience a sense of presence [conceptually replicating the findings of Houran and Thalbourne 137. Two or three times in my life, there have been a few brief moments when I felt very close to a Universal Consciousness. 0.55 15. I have had a vision. 0.49 29. While sitting quietly, I have had uplifting sensations as if I were driving quickly over a rolling road. 0.44 60. Sometimes I am so 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1969.8
have had uplifting sensations as if I were driving quickly over a rolling road. 0.44 60. Sometimes I am so full of pep and energy that I feel superhuman. 0.43 is a real phenomenon. 0.43 109. I have had experiences when I felt as if I were somewhere else. 0.43 88. I often feel as if things are not real. 0.42 38. At least once in my life very late at night, I have felt the presence of another Being. 0.42 20. Sometimes I am sure that people can tell what I am thinking. 0.41 17. An inner voice has told me 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1970.07
Sometimes I am sure that people can tell what I am thinking. 0.41 17. An inner voice has told me where to find something and it was actually there. 0.41 104. Although I am not sure, there is a good possibility that I have lived in a previous time. 0.39 71. My soul sometimes leaves my body. 0.39 40. When I have a tough decision to make, a sign will be given and I will know what to do. 0.39 63. Sometimes in the early morning hours between midnight and 4.00 A.M., my experiences are very meaningful. 0.38 23. There have been 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1970.22
in the early morning hours between midnight and 4.00 A.M., my experiences are very meaningful. 0.38 23. There have been times when I have stared at an object and it appeared to become larger and larger. 0.38 12. Sometimes an event will occur that has special significance for me only. 0.37 133. I have been visited by Spiritual Beings. 0.36 35. I have had a religious experience that I know was real. 0.36 101. There is an Eternal and Infinite Force. 0.35 76. I have heard an inner voice call my name. 0.35 25. Once I start talking in an enjoyable setting, 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1970.37
76. I have heard an inner voice call my name. 0.35 25. Once I start talking in an enjoyable setting, I have a hard time leaving. 0.33 62. When relaxed or just before falling asleep, I sometimes feel pleasant vibrations moving through my whole body. 0.32 128. Most people should be guided to insure their spiritual development. 0.31 138. My first religious or mystical experience occurred before I was a teenager. 0.28 106. Once in a while, I think of things too bad to talk about. 0.28 103. I have learned to meditate. 0.28 97. I sometimes feel a sensation or a bulge 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1970.52
to talk about. 0.28 103. I have learned to meditate. 0.28 97. I sometimes feel a sensation or a bulge in my abdomen. 0.28 82. At least once a month, I experience intense smells that do not have an obvious source. they have beliefs about such phenomena as reincarnation, telepathy and clairvoyance, they depersonalize, they have auditory vestibular experiences my name’’, ‘‘While sitting quietly, I have had uplifting sensations as if I were driving quickly over a rolling road’’), tend to be hypomanic (though the cluster may bear some improvement), they like intense meaning (e.g. ‘‘I like poetry’’), display unusual olfactory experiences 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1970.68
hypomanic (though the cluster may bear some improvement), they like intense meaning (e.g. ‘‘I like poetry’’), display unusual olfactory experiences (there is one such item in the Revised Transliminality Scale), show perseveration or so, I’ll keep singing or thinking a part of a song again and again’’), display hypergraphia ‘‘After writing prose or poetry, I feel better’’), exhibit rare (potentially psychotic) symptoms ‘‘Evil spirits possess me at times’’), display limbic motor features and, finally, display conservative religious beliefs (e.g. ‘‘I believe in the second coming of Christ’’). These items arguably reflect a heightened integration among thoughts, emotions, and sensory experience temporal limbic 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1970.83
the second coming of Christ’’). These items arguably reflect a heightened integration among thoughts, emotions, and sensory experience temporal limbic structures and sensory association cortices)—a ‘‘synæsthetic like’’ process we hypothesized to underlie transliminality . Given that this proposed hyperconnectivity seems to inherently involve temporal lobe functioning, it is only to be expected that temporal lobe symptomatology would color many of the resulting transliminal experiences. As the primary seat of a rich complex of memory and fantasy, the temporal lobe has been hypothesized to instigate physiological experiences reminiscent of a mystical or religious nature . One persistent observation is the propensity for temporal 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1970.98
to instigate physiological experiences reminiscent of a mystical or religious nature . One persistent observation is the propensity for temporal lobe experiences to be permeated by vague references to death and religious themes; they occur in both nonparanormal and paranormal contexts. Indeed, it has long been known that temporal lobe epileptics are characterized by their obsession with religiosity and morbid themes , particularly if a psychotic element is involved . Accordingly, it is not surprising that 28 out of the 55 single items from the Personal Philosophy Inventory that correlated with scores on the Revised Transliminality Scale concern themes related to ‘‘spirituality.’’ 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1971.17
items from the Personal Philosophy Inventory that correlated with scores on the Revised Transliminality Scale concern themes related to ‘‘spirituality.’’ For example, highly transliminal individuals in the study tended to have learned to meditate. It would be interesting to know whether high transliminals are prone to taking up meditation, or whether meditation tends to make a person more transliminal by encouraging ‘cognitive kindling’ . The direction of cause and effect is unclear here. Certainly there is evidence that highly transliminal persons are more likely to be introspective , so these findings appear consistent. Transliminal experiences with religious or spiritual themes might be 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1971.37
more likely to be introspective , so these findings appear consistent. Transliminal experiences with religious or spiritual themes might be expected to generally elicit happy or elevated states. However, profound depressive states also seem possible in light of the fact that temporal lobe symptomatology can promote experiences with morbid themes. It was initially thought that a high level of transliminality is a psychologically uncomfortable condition— a distinctive state of consciousness in which the individual is relentlessly bombarded with internal and external stimuli. Because of this, high transliminals might turn to illicit substance use to relieve this negative state . The present results 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1971.57
Because of this, high transliminals might turn to illicit substance use to relieve this negative state . The present results suggest an alternative hypothesis. In some cases, it might be neither the amount of psychological material crossing thresholds into or out of consciousness nor poor coping abilities of high transliminals which promote a negative transliminal state. Instead, the degree of pleasantness or unpleasantness of a transliminal experience may be due in part to the themes that accompany the transliminal stimuli via temporal lobe symptomatology—and in this case individual differences are expected . 	Temporal lobe lability in the highly transliminal mind:  p1971.78
research has suggested that a number of environmental factors may be associated with a tendency for susceptible individuals to report mildly anomalous sensations typically associated with ‘‘haunted’’ locations, including a sense of presence, feeling dizzy, inexplicable smells, and so on. Factors that may be associated with such sensations include fluctuations in the electromagnetic field (EMF) and the presence of infrasound. A review of such work is presented, followed by the results of the ‘‘Haunt’’ project in which an attempt was made to construct an artificial ‘‘haunted’’ room by systematically varying 	The Haunt Project:  p0
results of the ‘‘Haunt’’ project in which an attempt was made to construct an artificial ‘‘haunted’’ room by systematically varying such environmental factors. Participants were required to spend 50 min in a specially constructed chamber, within which they were exposed to infrasound, complex EMFs, both or neither. They were informed in advance that during this period they might experience anomalous sensations and asked to record on a floor plan their location at the time of occurrence of any such sensations, along with a note of the time of occurrence and a brief description of the sensation. Upon completing the session in 	The Haunt Project:  p0.24
with a note of the time of occurrence and a brief description of the sensation. Upon completing the session in the experimental chamber, they were asked to complete three questionnaires. The first was an EXIT scale asking respondents to indicate whether or not they had experienced particular anomalous sensations. The second was the Australian Sheep–Goat Scale, a widely used measure of belief in and experience of the paranormal. The third was Persinger’s Personal Philosophy Inventory, although only the items that constitute the Temporal Lobe Signs (TLS) Inventory sub scale were scored. These items deal with psychological experiences typically associated with temporal 	The Haunt Project:  p0.51
the Temporal Lobe Signs (TLS) Inventory sub scale were scored. These items deal with psychological experiences typically associated with temporal lobe epilepsy but normally distributed throughout the general population. Although many participants reported anomalous sensations of various kinds, the number reported was unrelated to experimental condition but was related to Temporal Lobe Signs scores. The most parsimonious explanation for our findings is in terms of suggestibility. A recent poll by the Gallup Organization showed that 37% of Americans believed in haunted houses . A previous poll of British adults by MORI showed that 40% believed in ghosts and, of these, 37% 	The Haunt Project:  p0.78
houses . A previous poll of British adults by MORI showed that 40% believed in ghosts and, of these, 37% claimed to have personally experienced a ghost . Clearly, personal experience plays a large part in producing belief in ghosts and haunted locations, but how are we to explain such experiences? A number of theories have been proposed . People can often come to believe that their house or workplace is haunted following an initial unusual experience that seems to them only to be explicable in paranormal terms. That initial event may be psychological in nature episode of sleep paralysis; 	The Haunt Project:  p1.02
them only to be explicable in paranormal terms. That initial event may be psychological in nature episode of sleep paralysis; see French and Santomauro, or some physical event that defies any obvious explanation when the house was locked and empty). Tandy and Lawrence suggest a number of obscure non paranormal causes of ostensible ghostly activity including ‘‘water hammer in pipes and radiators (noises), electrical faults (fires, phone calls, video problems), structural faults (draughts, cold spots, damp spots, noises), seismic activity (object movement/destruction, noises) [.] and exotic organic phenomena (rats scratching, beetles ticking)’’. As one might expect, the effects of context and 	The Haunt Project:  p1.1
movement/destruction, noises) [.] and exotic organic phenomena (rats scratching, beetles ticking)’’. As one might expect, the effects of context and belief in ghosts (and the paranormal in general) all play a part in determining whether or not a particular location will be perceived as being haunted (and by whom). For example, Lange and Houran asked two groups of participants to walk around a disused cinema and to note whether they experienced any cognitive, physiological, emotional, psychic, and spiritual responses in reaction to their surroundings. Half of the participants were simply told that the property was currently being renovated whereas the other 	The Haunt Project:  p1.19
to their surroundings. Half of the participants were simply told that the property was currently being renovated whereas the other half was told that paranormal activity had been reported there. As predicted, the latter participants reported significantly more physical, emotional, psychic, and spiritual experiences than those in the former group. Wiseman et al. collected data from 678 participants walking around Hampton Court Palace, reported to be one of the most haunted locations in England. Those who believed in ghosts reported more unusual experiences as they walked around than did non believers and they were also more likely to attribute these experiences 	The Haunt Project:  p1.27
unusual experiences as they walked around than did non believers and they were also more likely to attribute these experiences to ghostly intervention. It has recently been argued that certain environmental factors associated with particular locations may be directly causing susceptible individuals to experience anomalous sensations. Lange et al. point out that the anomalous sensations typically associated with haunted locations include a diverse range of phenomena from fairly mild experiences, such as perceived sudden changes in temperature, unusual odours, and a sense of presence, up to full blown apparitions. Such phenomena, it has been suggested, may be induced in some 	The Haunt Project:  p1.36
a sense of presence, up to full blown apparitions. Such phenomena, it has been suggested, may be induced in some people by exposure to unusual geomagnetic and electromagnetic fields (EMF) Such unusual fields could have a number of causes including the natural variability in the Earth’s field, movements of tectonic plates against each other, local geological factors such as quartz based rock and magnetic mineral properties, and man made electrical devices . The first line of evidence to support this notion comes from a number of studies that have measured the EMFs in reputedly haunted locations. EMFs at any specific location 	The Haunt Project:  p1.45
comes from a number of studies that have measured the EMFs in reputedly haunted locations. EMFs at any specific location constantly vary both spatially and temporally. Some studies have found that reputedly haunted locations show unusual overall levels in the EMFs present some that the variability and complexity of the field is unusual some that both ambient levels and variability are unusual and a few find no field anomalies at all . Furthermore, Persinger claims that reports of anomalous experiences, including those associated with poltergeist activity tend to occur more often during periods of heightened geomagnetic activity caused by tectonic stresses 	The Haunt Project:  p1.53
those associated with poltergeist activity tend to occur more often during periods of heightened geomagnetic activity caused by tectonic stresses in the Earth’s crust (but see Rutkowski, 1984, and Wilkinson As pointed out by Braithwaite , one major problem with this approach is the relative lack of time linked synchronized) recordings at both a reputedly haunted location and a reputedly non haunted comparison location (see Without such data, it is quite possible that as many magnetic anomalies exist in both types of environment especially given the inconsistency of results reported from the reputedly haunted locations. Furthermore, Braithwaite emphasizes the need for 	The Haunt Project:  p1.62
of environment especially given the inconsistency of results reported from the reputedly haunted locations. Furthermore, Braithwaite emphasizes the need for simultaneous recordings from both target and baseline control sites in order to eliminate the possibility that a time based difference is misinterpreted as a spatial difference. If recordings are not taken simultaneously, it is possible, for example, that anomalous fields were occurring at both sites during the first recording and neither during the second. If the first recording was at the ‘‘haunted’’ site, investigators might erroneously conclude that they have further evidence for the EMF hypothesis. Braithwaite provides evidence from 	The Haunt Project:  p1.7
the ‘‘haunted’’ site, investigators might erroneously conclude that they have further evidence for the EMF hypothesis. Braithwaite provides evidence from his own study, using simultaneous recordings from haunted and nearby baseline areas, that the magnetic field was indeed unusual at the former whilst simultaneously no unusual fields were recorded at the latter but such studies are rare to date. The idea that field complexity may be more important than overall ambient field strength in inducing such experiences is supported by a further line of evidence, that is, results from laboratory based studies. Across a series of studies, Persinger and colleagues claimto 	The Haunt Project:  p1.79
further line of evidence, that is, results from laboratory based studies. Across a series of studies, Persinger and colleagues claimto have induced anomalous experiences, including in one case that of a full blown apparition , by exposing the temporal lobes of the brain to transcerebral complex magnetic fields. It is claimed that such effects are particularly likely in participants with labile temporal lobes who will tend to score highly on Makarec and Persinger’s Temporal Lobe Signs (TLS) scale. For example, Cook and Persinger reported that six out of eight participants with high scores on the Temporal Lobe Signs felt a presence 	The Haunt Project:  p1.88
and Persinger reported that six out of eight participants with high scores on the Temporal Lobe Signs felt a presence upon being exposed to transcerebral complex magnetic fields, whereas none of their eight low scoring participants did. The exact mechanism whereby exposure of the temporal lobes to complex magnetic fields could cause anomalous experiences in susceptible individuals is not yet clear. Braithwaite argues that the fact that such effects only seem to occur in the laboratory after prolonged exposure suggests that ‘‘the mechanism of interaction is a subtle one perhaps at the level of psychopharmacological effects between synapses of neurons or 	The Haunt Project:  p1.96
‘‘the mechanism of interaction is a subtle one perhaps at the level of psychopharmacological effects between synapses of neurons or increased hyperpolarisation of specific inhibitory neuronal systems.’’ The consequences of such effects might be neuronal disinhibition producing altered mental states and hallucinations. Unfortunately, until very recently there had been no attempt by independent investigators to replicate Persinger’s research using transcerebral complex magnetic fields. One such attempt was recently reported. Granqvist et al. carried out a double blind study , comparing the effects of transcerebral complex magnetic fields with shamfields. They found no evidence that magnetic fields induced sensed presence, mystical, 	The Haunt Project:  p2.05
the effects of transcerebral complex magnetic fields with shamfields. They found no evidence that magnetic fields induced sensed presence, mystical, or other somatosensory experiences, but personality measures such as absorption, Temporal Lobe Signs scores, and orientation towards a new age lifestyle did predict the occurrence of such experiences. They therefore argued that the effects previously reported by Persinger , Persinger and Cameron , Persinger and Koren , Persinger et al. may well be nothing more than the effects of suggestibility manifesting themselves in experiments with inadequate use of doubleblind procedures. Persinger and Koren have robustly rejected such criticism, claiming that their 	The Haunt Project:  p2.12
themselves in experiments with inadequate use of doubleblind procedures. Persinger and Koren have robustly rejected such criticism, claiming that their work does make use of adequate double blind procedures and pointing out what they felt were methodological problems with Granqvist et al.’s replication attempt. However, Larsson et al. were not persuaded by the objections put forward and remain convinced that Persinger had indeed failed to ensure proper double blind methodology. Clearly, further research is urgently needed in this potentially fruitful, if controversial, area. Another suggested cause of anomalous experiences is the presence of infrasound, that is, sounds of such a low 	The Haunt Project:  p2.21
controversial, area. Another suggested cause of anomalous experiences is the presence of infrasound, that is, sounds of such a low frequency that they are outside the audible range for human beings. Tandy and Lawrence produced evidence that a standing wave at a frequency of 18.9 Hz was present in a factory in which several workers had unusual experiences, including Tandy himself who reported seeing an apparition in his peripheral visual field. In a subsequent investigation, Tandy showed that infrasound at 19 Hz was present in a 14th century cellar beneath the Tourist Information Centre in Coventry. Several visitors to the cellar 	The Haunt Project:  p2.29
Hz was present in a 14th century cellar beneath the Tourist Information Centre in Coventry. Several visitors to the cellar had previously reported anomalous sensations including a sense of presence and apparitions. Braithwaite and Townsend have argued strongly that the case to date for a specific role for infrasound in inducing haunt type experiences is weak. Amongst their criticisms, they note that there is a lack of comparison baseline data relating to this hypothesis. It is unclear how often infrasound would be recorded from reputedly non haunted locations and therefore one is once again faced with the possibility that the 	The Haunt Project:  p2.37
would be recorded from reputedly non haunted locations and therefore one is once again faced with the possibility that the hypothesis is based upon the positive test fallacy. Without data relating to the presence or absence of infrasound at both reputedly haunted and non haunted locations, one simply cannot properly assess the validity of this hypothesis. Experimental studies of the effects of directly manipulating the presence or absence of infrasound, as in the current study, offer a powerful alternative approach to test the hypothesis. Braithwaite and Townsend also criticise the neuropsychological mechanism proposed by Tandy and Lawrence to explain the postulated 	The Haunt Project:  p2.45
test the hypothesis. Braithwaite and Townsend also criticise the neuropsychological mechanism proposed by Tandy and Lawrence to explain the postulated effects of infrasound. Tandy and Lawrence had proposed that the effects may be produced as a direct consequence of infrasound inducing vibration in the human eyeball due to resonance. Braithwaite and Townsend present a detailed critique of this argument pointing out, amongst other things, that such vibration would be expected to produce visual distortion across the entire visual field rather than just in peripheral vision and that, furthermore, such vibration would be unlikely to produce complex and sustained hallucinatory experiences. Such 	The Haunt Project:  p2.53
just in peripheral vision and that, furthermore, such vibration would be unlikely to produce complex and sustained hallucinatory experiences. Such visual effects have not been reported in previous investigations of the effects of infrasound. However, the notion that both infrasound and EMF anomalies might contribute to explain some haunt type experiences have gained considerable popularity thanks to widespread dissemination in the media, despite the relative lack of strong supporting evidence, to the extent that the current attempt to investigate the possible effects of these factors experimentally was felt to be justified. The current experiment therefore reports an initial attempt to investigate 	The Haunt Project:  p2.61
effects of these factors experimentally was felt to be justified. The current experiment therefore reports an initial attempt to investigate whether, based upon this previous research and speculation, it would be possible to artificially construct a ‘‘haunted’’ room. Specifically, we wanted to investigate whether exposure to complex EMFs, infrasound, or both in combination would lead participants to experience more anomalous sensations compared to a baseline condition. The artificial room used was completely empty, white, and circular. Informal pilot testing had suggested that dim illumination and a cool temperature would be the most suitable conditions for this study, insofar as they 	The Haunt Project:  p2.69
suggested that dim illumination and a cool temperature would be the most suitable conditions for this study, insofar as they are the conditions typically associated with reputedly haunted locations. Participants were asked to spend 50 min in the room and to record on a floor plan a brief description of any anomalous sensations they experienced, where they were when the experience occurred and the time at which it occurred. A version of the EXIT scale , which asks respondents whether specific anomalous sensations have occurred, was also employed in this study. Participants were asked to complete the EXIT scale upon leaving 	The Haunt Project:  p2.77
anomalous sensations have occurred, was also employed in this study. Participants were asked to complete the EXIT scale upon leaving the room. It was hypothesised that a greater number of unusual experiences would be recorded on the floor plan and that higher scores on the EXIT scale would be found for those participants exposed to EMF and/or infrasound. Essentially, these two scores were both measuring the number of experiences reported, using open ended and closed methodologies, respectively. Additionally, it was hypothesised that those scoring high on the Temporal Lobe Signs scale might be particularly susceptible to the effects of EMF. Alternatively, 	The Haunt Project:  p2.85
that those scoring high on the Temporal Lobe Signs scale might be particularly susceptible to the effects of EMF. Alternatively, if previously reported effects were due mainly to suggestibility, we might find that the actual condition in which participants were run would not have an effect but those scoring higher on the Temporal Lobe Signs and Australian Sheep– Goat Scales (ASGS) would report more unusual experiences anyway. 2.1. Participants A total of 79 volunteer participants took part in the experiment, with a mean age (in years) of 32.25 Participants were recruited through web sites (e.g., www.haque.co.uk) and email lists and English 	The Haunt Project:  p2.93
a mean age (in years) of 32.25 Participants were recruited through web sites (e.g., www.haque.co.uk) and email lists and English Language students at a London school). 2.2. Design and statistical analyses (infrasound present vs infrasound absent) design. Details of the generation and presentation of the EMF and infrasound are presented below. Participants were allocated to condition on a random basis (by UH), resulting in the following distribution of participants across conditions: EMF absent, infrasound absent ; EMF absent, infrasound present ; EMF present, infrasound absent (23; EMF present, infrasound present (18; The primary hypotheses of the study were investigated using 	The Haunt Project:  p2.69
; EMF present, infrasound absent (23; EMF present, infrasound present (18; The primary hypotheses of the study were investigated using two separate hierarchical multiple regressions, one to predict the EXIT scores and one to predict the total number of experiences reported. In each case the predictor variables entered on the first step were the centred Temporal Lobe Signs and Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scores, along with presence/absence of EMF and infrasound (dummy The predicted interaction between EMF and Temporal Lobe Signs scores was investigated by entering the cross products of these variables as the second step in the regression analyses. 2.3. Materials 	The Haunt Project:  p2.11
was investigated by entering the cross products of these variables as the second step in the regression analyses. 2.3. Materials and equipment Care was taken to ensure that the levels of infrasound and the varying EMF fields were all completely safe and full ethical approval was obtained from the Goldsmiths College Ethics Committee for this project. It was important that participants would not be consciously aware of the presence of infrasound during the experiment proper and so pilot tests were run to determine the level to be used. At high intensities, one can actually feel infrasound even though it cannot be 	The Haunt Project:  p2.29
to determine the level to be used. At high intensities, one can actually feel infrasound even though it cannot be heard. Pilot participants were asked to indicate by means of a button press at what point they became aware that a stimulus was being played to them on each trial in which the stimulus volume rose from silence to full volume over 22 sec. Participants were informed that no stimulus would be played to them on half the trials. The trials when a stimulus was played to them consisted of three trials each at the following frequencies: 15, 17, 19, 21, 	The Haunt Project:  p2.46
when a stimulus was played to them consisted of three trials each at the following frequencies: 15, 17, 19, 21, 23 and 25 Hz. It was thus established that no participant was able to perceive infrasound at a level below 75 dB. No such pilot testing was deemed necessary for the EMF stimulation, as such fields are never consciously perceived. The infrasound waveform used was generated by combining two sine waves at 18.9 and 22.3 Hz (frequencies that correspond to create a more ‘‘complex’’ waveform that had somewhat similar characteristics to that recorded in Coventry. This was amplified and output 	The Haunt Project:  p2.64
create a more ‘‘complex’’ waveform that had somewhat similar characteristics to that recorded in Coventry. This was amplified and output through a purpose built cabinet at a level that was determined from prior experimentation to be below the general ability of human beings to perceive consciously. Measurements indicated that the background noise level in the experimental chamber with all equipment switched off was 50 and 65 dB with the air conditioning switched on. With infrasound switched on, the noise level was 75 dB. The magnetic field waveform was based upon that used by Persinger et al. . The Persinger burst pattern 	The Haunt Project:  p2.82
75 dB. The magnetic field waveform was based upon that used by Persinger et al. . The Persinger burst pattern was generated by constructing a table of values from the graph of the waveform used and then converting these numeric values into a 16 bit.wav file using Goldwave (software) at a sample rate of 1000 Hz for playback via the computer’s soundcard. This was output via the computer’s soundcard and amplified to drive two coils set next to the wall of the space but hidden behind it; the first was 100 turns of 1200mm diameter, the second was 200 turns at 	The Haunt Project:  p3
the space but hidden behind it; the first was 100 turns of 1200mm diameter, the second was 200 turns at 800mmdiameter. The combined output level was calibrated so that at its maximum it was under 50,000 nT. At all stages, including the actual output in the space, the accuracy of the signal was monitored by oscilloscope. A circular featureless chamber measuring approximately 3 m in diameter and 4 m high was built using white canvas on a slotted axle frame inside a standard row house apartment in North London. The temperature was approximately 18 C and the light level was about 	The Haunt Project:  p3.17
a standard row house apartment in North London. The temperature was approximately 18 C and the light level was about 1 lx . As can be seen from Fig. 1, most of the EMF output was concentrated in one quadrant of the experimental space (the diagram illustrates the areas where the output is greater than 25 and Participants signed an informed consent form before entering the experimental room and completed three scales upon leaving the room. The first was an EXIT scale containing 20 items asking if specific anomalous sensations had been felt and so on). Items were responded to 	The Haunt Project:  p3.35
EXIT scale containing 20 items asking if specific anomalous sensations had been felt and so on). Items were responded to as either ‘‘True’’ or ‘‘False’’ and the total score across the whole scale was recorded. Note that previous studies employing the EXIT scale have used a format with three response options , The change in response format was the result of a simple oversight. Granqvist et al. reported that the internal consistency across items was sufficient in their version of the EXIT scale to justify the creation of an average score across items. The unintentional change in response format had very 	The Haunt Project:  p3.53
EXIT scale to justify the creation of an average score across items. The unintentional change in response format had very little effect on internal consistency across items in the current study, lowering Cronbach’s alpha very slightly to .68. Therefore, responses were summed across items to give a total EXIT scale score . The second scale administered was the True–False version of the ASGS. The Australian Sheep-Goat Scale is designed to measure belief in, and alleged experience of, the paranormal. It consists of 18 items that all relate specifically to the three core concepts of parapsychology: ESP (extrasensory perception), psychokinesis (psychokinesis), and 	The Haunt Project:  p3.71
of 18 items that all relate specifically to the three core concepts of parapsychology: ESP (extrasensory perception), psychokinesis (psychokinesis), and life after death. Example items are ‘‘I believe I have personally exerted psychokinesis on at least one occasion’’ and ‘‘I believe in life after death’’. For all items, the response options are ‘‘True’’, ‘‘?’’ (i.e., don’t know) and ‘‘False’’ resulting in a score of 2, 1 or 0 points, respectively. Thus, the scale has a theoretical range from 0 to 36, with higher scores indicating higher levels of belief and experience. The Australian Sheep-Goat Scale has been widely used and has 	The Haunt Project:  p3.89
with higher scores indicating higher levels of belief and experience. The Australian Sheep-Goat Scale has been widely used and has proven reliability and validity Finally, participants completed the 140 item Personal Philosophy Inventory, but only the 30 items constituting the Temporal Lobe Signs scale were scored . These items relate to psychological experiences typically associated with temporal lobe epilepsy, but normally distributed in the general population, such as ‘‘Sometimes an event will occur which has special significance for me only’’ and ‘‘People tell me I ‘blank out’ sometimes when we are talking’’. According to Persinger, high scorers are particularly susceptible 	The Haunt Project:  p4.13
and ‘‘People tell me I ‘blank out’ sometimes when we are talking’’. According to Persinger, high scorers are particularly susceptible to EMF variability. The items are presented with a True–False response format and the number of ‘‘True’’ responses is tallied. The internal consistency and validity of the scale have been established . 2.4. Procedure Essentially, the experiment involved asking participants to spend 50 min alone wandering around inside the experimental room. During their time in this space they were asked to record any unusual sensations that they felt and to mark the spot on a floor plan at which the sensation 	The Haunt Project:  p4.49
record any unusual sensations that they felt and to mark the spot on a floor plan at which the sensation occurred, along with the time at which it occurred and a brief description of the experience. Participants were informed in advance that they might be exposed to varying EMFs, infrasound, both or neither, and that they might experience mildly unusual sensations as a result. Upon completing 50 min in the room, participants completed the three questionnaires and were fully debriefed. 3. Results 3.1. Descriptive statistics and preliminary analyses As participants were recruited from web sites and via email lists, it was 	The Haunt Project:  p4.85
Results 3.1. Descriptive statistics and preliminary analyses As participants were recruited from web sites and via email lists, it was possible that the sample recruited might show markedly higher levels of paranormal belief than the general population. However, the overall mean Australian Sheep-Goat Scale score for the sample was 12.97 which is similar to that found in other studies using the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale in which participants were not recruited in this way . Thus the sample appeared to be reasonably representative of the general population. Note that in all reported analyses, it is recognised that there will always be a 	The Haunt Project:  p5.06
representative of the general population. Note that in all reported analyses, it is recognised that there will always be a naturally occurring background field; ‘‘EMF present’’ refers to the presence of our artificially produced field over and above this naturally occurring background. Summary data are presented in Table 1. Initially, two way between groups Analyses of Variance (ANOVAs) were performed separately on the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and Temporal Lobe Signs scores with infrasound (present vs absent) and EMF (present vs absent) as factors. No significant main effects or interactions were found, showing that the random allocation of participants to conditions 	The Haunt Project:  p5.15
absent) as factors. No significant main effects or interactions were found, showing that the random allocation of participants to conditions had not resulted in unintentional sampling biases . The highest F value for the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale analysis was that associated with the infrasound EMF interaction [F ¼ 2.77, p ¼ .10], whilst that for the Temporal Lobe Signs analysis was that associated with the main effect for Infrasound [F ¼ 2.05, p ¼ .16]. Examination of the distribution of scores on the EXIT scale revealed that most participants reported some unusual sensations . Only 6.3% reported none and around 70% 	The Haunt Project:  p5.25
on the EXIT scale revealed that most participants reported some unusual sensations . Only 6.3% reported none and around 70% reported three or more. However, the distribution was quite positively skewed as was the distribution for the total number of experiences reported on the floor plan. Following Howell , both sets of data were transformed to normalise the distributions using the following transformation: Transformed score ¼ square root (original score)þ square root (original All further analyses were performed on the transformed scores.1 Across all participants, Temporal Lobe Signs scores correlated significantly with both the total number of experiences reported (r ¼ 	The Haunt Project:  p5.35
scores.1 Across all participants, Temporal Lobe Signs scores correlated significantly with both the total number of experiences reported (r ¼ .31, and the EXIT scale scores . Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scores correlated significantly with Temporal Lobe Signs scores (r ¼ .52, and EXIT scale scores , but the correlation between Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scores and the total number of experiences reported on the floor plan failed to reach significance . 3.1.1. Primary analyses Two hierarchical multiple regression analyses were carried out, one on the EXIT scale scores and one for the total number of experiences reported on the floor plan, using 	The Haunt Project:  p5.45
one on the EXIT scale scores and one for the total number of experiences reported on the floor plan, using the simultaneous entry (ENTER) method. In each case, the centred Temporal Lobe Signs and Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scores, along with presence/absence of EMF and infrasound , were entered on the first step as the predictor variables. The hypothesised two way interaction between EMF and Temporal Lobe Signs scores was examined in the second step by entering cross products of these two variables. Results of analyses for transformed EXIT scores and transformed total number of experiences are presented in Tables 2 	The Haunt Project:  p5.54
two variables. Results of analyses for transformed EXIT scores and transformed total number of experiences are presented in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. Both analyses revealed a similar pattern of results. In each case, on both EXIT scale and floor plan, the only significant predictor of the number of unusual experiences reported was the Temporal Lobe Signs score. EMF condition, infrasound condition and Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scores were not significantly related to either measure and neither, crucially, was the hypothesised interaction between EMF condition and Temporal Lobe Signs scores. Many participants in our study who spent 50 min in the experimental 	The Haunt Project:  p5.64
between EMF condition and Temporal Lobe Signs scores. Many participants in our study who spent 50 min in the experimental room reported anomalous sensations of various sorts. The EXIT scale revealed, for example, that 63 of the participants felt dizzy or odd, 39 felt like they were spinning around, 33 experienced recurrent ideas, 29 felt tingling sensations, 26 felt that they were somewhere else, 25 felt pleasant vibrations through their bodies, 20 heard a ticking sound, 18 felt detached from their bodies, 18 felt Fig. 2 – Three dimensional representation of the experimental set up used in this study indicating the 	The Haunt Project:  p5.74
bodies, 18 felt Fig. 2 – Three dimensional representation of the experimental set up used in this study indicating the positions of the infrasound cabinet and the EMFgenerating coils. 1 All analyses were also performed using the untransformed scores and the pattern of results produced was identical. Also, one referee felt that the format for the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scale might be somewhat confusing for some participants because the ‘‘?’’ response option might just as well indicate uncertainty regarding the meaning of an item (e.g., ‘‘What does psychokinesis mean?’’) as uncertainty regarding the ontological status of that particular paranormal claim (e.g., 	The Haunt Project:  p5.83
of an item (e.g., ‘‘What does psychokinesis mean?’’) as uncertainty regarding the ontological status of that particular paranormal claim (e.g., ‘‘I do not know if psychokinesis exists’’). In line with this referee’s suggestion, additional analyses were carried out with the ‘‘?’’ responses recoded as ‘‘0’’. Again, this made no difference to the pattern of effects found. a presence, 9 experienced sadness, 8 remembered images from recent dreams, 8 experienced odd smells, 7 experienced terror, and 4 experienced sexual arousal. 3.1.2. Secondary analysis As illustrated in Fig. 1, most of the EMF output was concentrated in one specific quadrant. However, a 	The Haunt Project:  p5.93
Secondary analysis As illustrated in Fig. 1, most of the EMF output was concentrated in one specific quadrant. However, a planned related t test revealed that no more unusual sensations were experienced in this quadrant than the average for the other three quadrants in those participants exposed to complex EMFs [t ¼ .85, not significant]. 4. Discussion As can be seen from Section 3, many of the participants in this experiment reported experiencing mildly anomalous sensations. To this extent, we can indeed claim some success in building a haunted room. It is possible that the experimental set up used in this 	The Haunt Project:  p6.05
indeed claim some success in building a haunted room. It is possible that the experimental set up used in this study (a quiet, round, cool, dimly lit, featureless white room) may have constituted a form of mild perceptual deprivation that was sufficient to induce a hallucinatory altered state of consciousness in some participants. Although the set up differed in significant ways from that used in Ganzfeld studies, the work of Wackermann et al. may be of relevance here. Furthermore, some of the auditory experiences reported by our participants may be a consequence of hyperacusis Delmon, submitted for publication). However, the degree 	The Haunt Project:  p6.22
the auditory experiences reported by our participants may be a consequence of hyperacusis Delmon, submitted for publication). However, the degree to which these anomalous sensations were reported was unrelated to the experimental conditions employed. Given that all participants were informed in advance that they might experience unusual sensations whilst in the chamber (in line with the ethical requirements of informed consent), the most parsimonious explanation of our findings is in terms of suggestibility. Such an explanation is supported by the fact that Temporal Lobe Signs scores, known to correlate with suggestibility , significantly predicted both the total number of anomalous experiences 	The Haunt Project:  p6.39
that Temporal Lobe Signs scores, known to correlate with suggestibility , significantly predicted both the total number of anomalous experiences reported on the floor plan and the scores on the EXIT scale. We feel that the data collected cast some light upon the psychology of hauntings. A considerable proportion of the participants reported a number of anomalous sensations in response to a fairly mild suggestion that in our white, round, featureless room they might feel some unusual sensations. Such an explanation is in line with the observations of Houran and Lange . They asked two volunteers to keep a diary 	The Haunt Project:  p6.56
explanation is in line with the observations of Houran and Lange . They asked two volunteers to keep a diary for 30 days of unusual events of the type that are traditionally associated with hauntings and poltergeists in a residence with no prior history of such activity. As expected, the instructions themselves were sufficient for the volunteers to note, with increasing frequency, anomalous or unusual events presumably simply because the volunteers were now primed to notice such phenomena. Our findings also failed to provide any support for the postulated link between the presence of infrasound and the experiencing of anomalous sensations. 	The Haunt Project:  p6.72
failed to provide any support for the postulated link between the presence of infrasound and the experiencing of anomalous sensations. It is possible that such effects may be found under different conditions to those employed in the present study. However, it is worth noting that Braithwaite and Townsend have recently strongly questioned the empirical basis for this alleged association. As previously stated, after examining the evidence put forward in support of the original claim and considering the proposed neurophysiological mechanisms put forward to underlie the effects, Braithwaite and Townsend concluded that the alleged link between anomalous experiences and infrasound had yet 	The Haunt Project:  p6.89
forward to underlie the effects, Braithwaite and Townsend concluded that the alleged link between anomalous experiences and infrasound had yet to be demonstrated and the current study failed to provide any evidence in favour of this hypothesis. Our results are consistent with the notion that suggestible participants responded to the general context of our experimental set up in such a way that they experienced and reported more anomalous sensations than less suggestible participants. It is worth noting that although the number of anomalous sensations reported appeared, on the basis of bivariate correlations, to be related to both (transformed) Temporal Lobe Signs 	The Haunt Project:  p7.03
of anomalous sensations reported appeared, on the basis of bivariate correlations, to be related to both (transformed) Temporal Lobe Signs and Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scores, the former appeared to be more strongly related than the latter in this study. The Temporal Lobe Signs scores correlated significantly with both the EXIT scale scores and the total number of experiences recorded on the floor plan, whereas the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale scores correlated significantly with only one of these measures. Furthermore, the only significant predictor to emerge from the multiple regression analyses was the Temporal Lobe Signs scores. It may be that this 	The Haunt Project:  p7.1
significant predictor to emerge from the multiple regression analyses was the Temporal Lobe Signs scores. It may be that this pattern of results reflects the general context of this experiment. The fact is that participants in the current study were not led to believe that the experimental room might really be haunted; they were simply told that they might experience some unusual sensations. Given the known power of contextual effects, it is quite probable that had the same participants been told to spend time in a room that was supposedly really haunted, paranormal belief levels would have had a much stronger 	The Haunt Project:  p7.17
to spend time in a room that was supposedly really haunted, paranormal belief levels would have had a much stronger relationship with the number of experiences reported. Systematic manipulation of such context effects is likely to be a fruitful area for future research. Previous research in other areas strongly suggests that context does influence the way in which respondents fill in questionnaires. As with many psychological experiments, this project raised several issues relating to the inevitable tension between the desirability for ecological validity on the one hand and the need for proper control on the other. To our knowledge, this is 	The Haunt Project:  p7.24
ecological validity on the one hand and the need for proper control on the other. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to investigate possible effects of applying infrasound and EMF systematically while participants moved around freely, albeit in a constrained space. Clearly, if we are attempting to understand possible psychological effects that relate to what people sometimes experience in allegedly haunted houses, it is more ecologically valid to allow people to move around in this way rather than, say, have them sitting still with their eyes closed wearing various magnetic field devices on their heads. On the other hand, 	The Haunt Project:  p7.32
have them sitting still with their eyes closed wearing various magnetic field devices on their heads. On the other hand, one has little control over their chosen movements and therefore one cannot stipulate precisely the actual amount or type of exposure they will receive. In the current study, time spent in each quadrant was not recorded. Future studies should either systematically record such information in order to ensure that all participants receive sufficient exposure to the complex EMF or actually specify the amount of time that participants are to spend in each area of the room. The nature of the 	The Haunt Project:  p7.39
specify the amount of time that participants are to spend in each area of the room. The nature of the field itself can vary infinitely and the participants’ movements through the field will add an extra level of complexity to the field as experienced. In this initial study we chose to base the artificial EMFs upon those used by Persinger, but we fully acknowledge that his experimental set up differs greatly from ours. Amongst the most obvious differences is that his participants do not wander around freely and the weak EMF is applied very close to the scalp. Our decision to 	The Haunt Project:  p7.46
participants do not wander around freely and the weak EMF is applied very close to the scalp. Our decision to administer the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and Temporal Lobe Signs after the participants had spent time in the experimental room along with the EXIT scale may seem a little unusual given that predictor variables and outcome measures are not usually assessed in such close temporal proximity. It was felt in this study, however, that to have administered the Australian Sheep-Goat Scale and the Temporal Lobe Signs prior to the participants entering the experimental room may have served to prime them with respect 	The Haunt Project:  p7.53
the Temporal Lobe Signs prior to the participants entering the experimental room may have served to prime them with respect to the type of sensations they might experience and the fact that the study was in some way related to the paranormal. Furthermore, given that both scales measure relatively stable trait like dispositions; the experimental manipulations would be unlikely to have any major impact upon how participants completed these scales. The decision as to whether to administer scales at the beginning or the end of experiments which involve participants being exposed to ostensibly paranormal experiences (OPEs) is always a difficult one. 	The Haunt Project:  p7.61
or the end of experiments which involve participants being exposed to ostensibly paranormal experiences (OPEs) is always a difficult one. If participants complete the scales prior to being exposed to the OPE, their responses on the scale might influence their reports of how they interpreted the OPE. For example, if one had just declared one’s complete disbelief in ESP, one may then be less inclined to accept as real a subsequent demonstration of what appeared to be that very ability (albeit that the demonstration may have been based upon trickery). On the other hand, if one had just witnessed such 	The Haunt Project:  p7.68
(albeit that the demonstration may have been based upon trickery). On the other hand, if one had just witnessed such a demonstration prior to completing the scales at the end of the experiment, the demonstration itself may have an effect upon one’s responses by making one feel more inclined to accept the possibility that ESP might really exist. Some investigators have opted for having half the participants complete paranormal belief scales before the experiment and the other half afterwards, but clearly there is no ideal solution to this dilemma. Furthermore, it should be noted that given the inevitably quasi experimental nature 	The Haunt Project:  p7.75
there is no ideal solution to this dilemma. Furthermore, it should be noted that given the inevitably quasi experimental nature of any investigation of the relationship between trait like dispositions (such as paranormal belief levels) and other variables, no strong conclusions can be drawn regarding the direction of causality involved regardless of when the tests are completed. Participants cannot be randomly allocated to belief levels and conclusions relating to such traits must always be tentatively drawn on the basis of the pattern of correlations revealed as opposed to the drawing of strong conclusions regarding the direction of causality. Although the results 	The Haunt Project:  p7.82
pattern of correlations revealed as opposed to the drawing of strong conclusions regarding the direction of causality. Although the results reported do not support the idea that complex EMFs play a role in inducing anomalous experiences, the limitations of the current experimental set up must be acknowledged. As stated, the decision to allow participants to wander around freely within the experimental space in the interests of ecological validity meant that the amount of time that they spent in those areas of the room affected by the complex EMF was not under experimental control. However, there was no evidence that more unusual 	The Haunt Project:  p7.89
the room affected by the complex EMF was not under experimental control. However, there was no evidence that more unusual sensations were reported when participants were in the quadrant most affected by EMF compared to the others. It should also be noted that practical limitations precluded the use of double blind methodology in this study. Although participants were unaware of the condition to which they had been allocated, the experimenters were aware of the condition. Had we found results supporting the EMF hypothesis, this might have raised questions regarding the validity of our findings, but as all experimenters were anticipating 	The Haunt Project:  p7.97
the EMF hypothesis, this might have raised questions regarding the validity of our findings, but as all experimenters were anticipating positive results, any unintended bias would presumably have favoured the EMF hypothesis. In future studies, however, it would be preferable to employ double blind methodology. A fruitful line for future research would be to focus more directly upon the possible neuropsychological bases for susceptibility to paranormal belief and the reporting of OPEs. Possible directions would be further investigations of the presumed association between paranormal belief and dopamine, and thus the increased likelihood of perceiving salient stimuli in noise . In connection 	The Haunt Project:  p8.07
association between paranormal belief and dopamine, and thus the increased likelihood of perceiving salient stimuli in noise . In connection with the findings relating to temporal lobe signs, early suggestions of hippocampal hypersensitivity also merit further exploration . It might be the case that paranormal believers demonstrate an uncritical affirmative response bias to acknowledge the existence of any event, as suggested by the literature on seeing meaning in random noise and Reed, 2005a, 2005b; Brugger et al., 1993; Blackmore, the ‘jump to conclusions’ style of reasoning or the increased likelihood of seeing a connection between random coincidences . It would be 	The Haunt Project:  p8.2
to conclusions’ style of reasoning or the increased likelihood of seeing a connection between random coincidences . It would be naı¨ve in the extreme to expect that a single neuropsychological basis would be uncovered that explained all aspects of paranormal belief and experience given the complexity of the phenomena themselves, but it is certain that neuropsychology will provide many important insights in this area. Similarly, no one has ever suggested that postulated EMF and infrasound effects, either alone or in combination, would provide a comprehensive explanation for all alleged hauntings, even if cases based on sincere misinterpretation of naturally occurring phenomena 	The Haunt Project:  p8.33
would provide a comprehensive explanation for all alleged hauntings, even if cases based on sincere misinterpretation of naturally occurring phenomena and cases of deliberate hoax are excluded (for examples of such cases, see Baker and Nickell, 1992; Christopher, 1971; Morris, 1977–1978; Randi, 1984– Taking the current findings in the context of previous relevant research, it is clear that factors such as suggestibility, temporal lobe liability, context effects and the role of environmental variables merit further exploration in our attempts to understand this fascinating phenomenon. The case for infrasound inducing haunt type experiences now appears to be extremely weak, in light 	The Haunt Project:  p8.46
understand this fascinating phenomenon. The case for infrasound inducing haunt type experiences now appears to be extremely weak, in light of Braithwaite and Townsend’s powerful critique and the current negative findings. Wefeel, however, that the possibility of EMF related effects is worthy for further investigation. Although, to date, no independent investigator has replicated the results reported by Persinger , Persinger and Cameron , Persinger and Koren , Persinger et al. using transcerebral complex magnetic fields, evidence from other sources is at least suggestive of the possibility that the EMF hypothesis might yet be verified. The work of Braithwaite , Braithwaite et 	The Haunt Project:  p8.59
least suggestive of the possibility that the EMF hypothesis might yet be verified. The work of Braithwaite , Braithwaite et al. , Braithwaite and Townsend provides, in our opinion, the most compelling evidence to date although we feel that it is not yet possible to draw a definitive conclusion on this matter. In contrast to infrasound, where the waveform used in the current experiment might reasonably have been expected to induce anomalous experiences if the infrasound hypothesis is correct, EMFs vary with respect to many more parameters. It may simply be that our choice of waveform was not suitable for our 	The Haunt Project:  p8.72
with respect to many more parameters. It may simply be that our choice of waveform was not suitable for our experimental set up. In future work, we intend to base the EMF waveforms upon those directly recorded from reputedly haunted locations 2004; Braithwaite et al., 2004; Braithwaite and Townsend, by ‘‘replaying’’ data collected from such a site. We readily acknowledge that ours was a very conservative test of the hypothesis that complex EMFs may induce anomalous experiences in susceptible individuals and feel that further tests of the hypothesis are justified. 	The Haunt Project:  p8.85
United States According to a poll conducted by Gallup, 37% of Americans believe houses can be haunted . There are also hundreds of paranormal research groups and societies in all 50 states who investigate and research paranormal activity. Within the last decade, paranormal activity has become increasingly popular in the media, with numerous television shows that follow paranormal investigators or share personal paranormal experiences . However, interest in the paranormal is not new; people have believed in spirits since biblical times. Many hypotheses have surfaced as to why paranormal activity manifests 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p0
not new; people have believed in spirits since biblical times. Many hypotheses have surfaced as to why paranormal activity manifests at a particular location; some locations of which are related to the geology and hydrology of a location. These hypotheses include tectonic strain, stone tape, running water, and magnetic anomaly theories. This research attempts to spatially analyze variables, using the Geographic Information System (GIS), that may promote and increase manifestation of paranormal activity. This research will also use alleged haunted locations to analyze correlations between the locations and individual geological and hydrological features. Results of this study indicate one or more 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p0.19
to analyze correlations between the locations and individual geological and hydrological features. Results of this study indicate one or more geological or hydrological features are suitable for paranormal activity to manifest. Introduction Paranormal is defined as not scientifically explainable Given the definition, it is not surprising the academic world recognizes parapsychology as a pseudoscience. One of the main arguments the scientific community disregards paranormal research as a science is because most investigators conduct research in a noncontrolled environmental and the results have yet to be proven as statistically significant . Currently, most paranormal research is conducted by investigating an allegedly “haunted location” 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p0.41
yet to be proven as statistically significant . Currently, most paranormal research is conducted by investigating an allegedly “haunted location” and collecting evidence. An unexplainable auditory phenomenon is considered to occur more than a visual phenomenon . Examples of auditory phenomenon include footsteps, knocking, voices, music, and sounds of objects moving, which can be heard first hand, or recorded. Recorded auditory manifestations recorded on magnetic tape which can be heard when the recording is played back later is known as Electronic Voice Phenomenon (EVP) . Other unexplainable events associated with paranormal activity or a “haunting” include, feeling of cold masses or 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p0.63
Voice Phenomenon (EVP) . Other unexplainable events associated with paranormal activity or a “haunting” include, feeling of cold masses or cold breezes, the sense of not being alone, the appearance of lights, phantom smells, and objects moving. It is also suggested animals have a heighten perception of paranormal activity and can become distressed . Manifestations of paranormal activity are more common at night; however, occurrences have been reported during the day . For the purposes of this research, a haunting is defined as a recurrent phenomenon (visual and/or auditory), of alleged paranormal nature associated with a particular location However, it is also 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p0.84
as a recurrent phenomenon (visual and/or auditory), of alleged paranormal nature associated with a particular location However, it is also suggested haunting type phenomena may be connected to a person or family and may fallow these individuals from one location to another . The paranormal research community has adopted many hypotheses suggesting paranormal activity is influenced by geological features such as faults, magnetism/geomagnetism , limestone, magnetite, and quartz . The tectonic strain theory is one of the most popular hypotheses linking geology to reports of paranormal activity . This hypothesis suggests stress less than what is required to generate an earthquake, 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p1.05
geology to reports of paranormal activity . This hypothesis suggests stress less than what is required to generate an earthquake, within the Earth’s crust, may result in piezoelectricity in sub surface rock due to highly localized surface electromagnetic disturbances The Stone Tape theory is popular among paranormal investigators. This theory suggests limestone, quartz and/or magnetite deposits can store information, such as an historical event. When the information is released, a residual haunting can occur A residual haunting occurs when a past event is imprinted on these features at a certain location and is ‘replayed’ in the present Paranormal investigators validate this 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p1.22
event is imprinted on these features at a certain location and is ‘replayed’ in the present Paranormal investigators validate this hypothesis by using the First Law of Thermodynamics , which states, energy cannot be created or destroyed, but can be changed from one form to another. Parapsychologists have adopted a similar theory called place memory. It is thought information can be stored by the environment and retrieved through extrasensory perception. It is suggested that for place memory to exist, the living are involved, and emotion is involved in either the creation or retrieval of memory. Little is known about how place memory 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p1.39
involved, and emotion is involved in either the creation or retrieval of memory. Little is known about how place memory is stored, however parapsychologists do believe the local geomagnetic field, geological features, and weather may influence the storage and retrieval of place memory . Paranormal investigators also suggest paranormal activity can alter magnetic fields, while others think paranormal activity uses energy from an area with a high magnetic field to manifest; thus, it is hypothesized an area with magnetite deposits can generate residual hauntings . In addition, quartz based rock and rock containing magnetic minerals can have a significant effect on 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p1.56
generate residual hauntings . In addition, quartz based rock and rock containing magnetic minerals can have a significant effect on the spatial distribution of magnetic anomalies Bunton Stasyshyn, and Davis, 2009; Paranormal research groups favor quartz due to its structure and ability to absorb and amplify energy such as a piezoelectric circuit . It is also hypothesized running water can be used as a source of energy, much like a battery for paranormal activity. In The Other Side: A Paranormal Blog at Rapid City Journal.com, Mark Rowland, the lead investigator for the Black Hills Paranormal Investigations summarized this theory by explaining, “because 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p1.73
Rapid City Journal.com, Mark Rowland, the lead investigator for the Black Hills Paranormal Investigations summarized this theory by explaining, “because paranormal activity is believed to be electrical in nature and water is an electrical conductor, water can conduct paranormal activity” . Furthermore, Rowland suggests because running water produces energy, and paranormal activity requires energy to manifest, it can draw the required energy from running water . The objective of this research is not to prove or disprove whether paranormal manifestations are a result of hallucinations or a real external event, but rather to use current hypotheses to conduct an analysis of 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p1.91
a result of hallucinations or a real external event, but rather to use current hypotheses to conduct an analysis of locations where these hypotheses suggest paranormal phenomena may occur. In addition, locations investigated by the popular television show Ghost Hunters will be used to analyze correlations between the location they have investigated and the individual geological and hydrological features, as well as the calculated suitability of the location. Methods Relevant Data Esri’s ArcMap and ArcCatalog (version were utilized for data analysis in all steps of this project. Data included U.S. National Atlas Water Features shapefile from Esri 2012 data, shapefiles of 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p2.09
in all steps of this project. Data included U.S. National Atlas Water Features shapefile from Esri 2012 data, shapefiles of faults, Mineral Resources Data System (MRDS) and digital geology maps from the United States Geological Survey (USGS). These data are freely available to the public. A point shapefile was created by geocoding locations investigated by Ghost Hunters, a television show detailing paranormal activity. Location data was collected from an episodes list located on Wikipedia. Location data were then either geocoded using a batch geocode service or coordinates were collected from the historical site’s respective Wikipedia page and truth checked. Attribute tables were 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p2.29
batch geocode service or coordinates were collected from the historical site’s respective Wikipedia page and truth checked. Attribute tables were exported to Excel using X Tools pro. Manifestation Suitability Model The manifestation suitability model was developed after a review of similar models. Six parameters where chosen after reviewing paranormal theories. These included the following parameters: faults, streams, rock unit lithologies containing quartz, limestone deposits, locations with large localized deposits of quartz, and locations with large localized abundance of magnetite. First, all 50 U.S. states’ geology, faults, streams, and mineral data as well as tables containing geological unit descriptions were downloaded. Limestone 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p2.49
50 U.S. states’ geology, faults, streams, and mineral data as well as tables containing geological unit descriptions were downloaded. Limestone and quartz polygons, streams, and fault lines, and quartz and magnetite points shapefiles were created by merging, querying, and exporting the data to new shapefiles. Next, the geocoded haunted locations table was imported to ArcMap and a point shapefile was created. Once the preliminary data manipulations were completed, the limestone and quartz polygons were converted to raster data . Figure 1. Limestone and quartz raster data. The remaining data, running water, faults, quartz points, and magnetite were converted to raster data by 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p2.68
and quartz raster data. The remaining data, running water, faults, quartz points, and magnetite were converted to raster data by using the spatial analyst tool, Euclidean Distance. All raster data had a cell size of 152.4 meters and all outputs were reclassified so no data equaled zero. The paranormal hypotheses do not directly address the specific proximity to these environmental features required for paranormal activity to manifest, therefore distances used were chosen by a subjective interpretation of the hypotheses. Running water theory suggests distances for paranormal activity to manifest would need to be relatively close to running water, therefore, a distance 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p2.89
theory suggests distances for paranormal activity to manifest would need to be relatively close to running water, therefore, a distance of 304 meters was chosen for this analysis . Figure 2. Sample of running water raster near Denver, created using Euclidean distance tool, a distance of 304 meters was used in this analysis. Tectonic strain theory suggests energy required to influence paranormal activity is localized near fault lines. Rutkowski determined the radius of energy release for a very large earthquake to be about 12 miles to 31 miles. As a result, a distance 8046.72 meters was used for the fault parameter Stone 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p3.13
about 12 miles to 31 miles. As a result, a distance 8046.72 meters was used for the fault parameter Stone tape theory suggests events from the past can be recorded on rocks such as limestone and lithologies containing quartz or areas with a high abundance of magnetite or quartz deposits. Therefore, paranormal activity should only occur in a location where these features are present. However, because the shapefile for high abundances of magnetite or quartz is a point, a larger distance of 804.7 meters was chosen for this analysis . Figure 3. Fault raster created using Euclidean distance tool, a distance 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p3.43
of 804.7 meters was chosen for this analysis . Figure 3. Fault raster created using Euclidean distance tool, a distance of 8046.72 meters was used in this analysis. Figure 4. Magnetite and quartz point raster created using the Euclidean distance tool. Distances of 804.7 meters were used in this analysis. Next, all raster data were reclassified in to equal intervals . The reclassified raster data was then aggregated and summed . Correlation between Haunted Locations and Environmental Criteria To determine if there was a correlation between the haunted locations , environmental criteria and level of suitability, the calculated raster’s values were 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p3.74
there was a correlation between the haunted locations , environmental criteria and level of suitability, the calculated raster’s values were extracted at each haunted point location. Then, fields generated in the attribute table were exported to Excel using X Tools pro. Each haunted location was assigned a number based on the Ghost Hunters analysis and evidence review. Locations deemed haunted were assigned a one while locations that did not show any evidence of paranormal activity were assigned a zero. Locations where the investigation did not produce definitive results were deemed inconclusive and were not used in the correlation. Next, a point biserial 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p5.05
investigation did not produce definitive results were deemed inconclusive and were not used in the correlation. Next, a point biserial correlation was conducted using the new classifications of the haunted locations and suitability values. In addition, each environmental feature also was used in a point biserial correlation. Results/Discussion Predictive Paranormal Modeling The purpose of this research was to spatially analyze variables that may promote and increase the manifestation of paranormal activity to determine the validity of popular paranormal hypotheses and theories. Secondly, it attempted to analyze correlations between alleged haunted locations and predictive suitability in the U.S. as well as individual 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p5.47
Secondly, it attempted to analyze correlations between alleged haunted locations and predictive suitability in the U.S. as well as individual geological and hydrological features. The model returned a total of 1,030,036,346 acres , which is about 5.2% of the continental United States. Results suggest most suitable locations are located in the New England area and along the Appalachian Mountains, the north and south regions of the Rocky Mountains, as well as the west coast (Appendix A). The likelihood of paranormal activity manifesting near many of the environmental criteria (running water and faults) is already high because of the large density of those 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p5.88
near many of the environmental criteria (running water and faults) is already high because of the large density of those features in the United States. Further research is needed in the paranormal field to determine the distance from the environmental criteria paranormal activity can be and still manifest. Correlation between Haunted Locations and Environmental Criteria In Excel, alleged haunted locations were analyzed; each of the criteria was organized in pivot tables. The tables were used to determine if there were any commonalities between the haunted locations and criteria. Results indicate haunted locations were more common within suitable proximity to faults and 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p6.27
commonalities between the haunted locations and criteria. Results indicate haunted locations were more common within suitable proximity to faults and lithology containing quartz . Additionally, haunted locations were least commonly associated with suitable areas of high quartz and magnetite deposits . Table 2 illustrates results partitioned according to reclassifications. Point biserial correlation concluded haunted locations biserial classification and level of suitability were not significantly related r = 0.05, p ≥ 0.05, . Limestone had the highest positive correlation with the haunted location biserial classification; the probability value indicates the correlation was highly significant, r = 0.22, p ≤ 0.01. The results 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p6.66
location biserial classification; the probability value indicates the correlation was highly significant, r = 0.22, p ≤ 0.01. The results also suggest a significant correlation between localized areas of quartz deposits and haunted locations, r = 0.15, p ≤ 0.05. The other criteria did not correlate to the haunted location biserial classification nor where they statistically significant. Statistics suggest paranormal theories may have some validity according to this research. As a disclaimer, proactive methods were used to contact paranormal groups for localized data. Many paranormal groups were contacted and asked to share evidence based haunted location data. Unfortunately, additional data was unable 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p7.02
data. Many paranormal groups were contacted and asked to share evidence based haunted location data. Unfortunately, additional data was unable to be obtained from these sources in support of this exploratory research. For this research to succeed, a larger alleged haunted location dataset is needed, as well as data that is more dispersed throughout the county. The Ghost Hunters haunted location data did not achieve either of these. The data is mostly located on the east coast, and only publically known sites were used, as private residence locations were not shared. Another concern with the validity of this research is directly 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p7.21
sites were used, as private residence locations were not shared. Another concern with the validity of this research is directly related to the validity of the Ghost Hunters television show. Questions remain if their paranormal activity is real or staged for television scripts and ratings. This was particularly concerning when sites were categorized into “haunted” or “not haunted.” As the seasons of the television show progressed, more and more sites were stated to be haunted. From a research perspective, it should be known the validity of paranormal data may be called into suspect nature, as it is unknown if this could be 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p7.4
known the validity of paranormal data may be called into suspect nature, as it is unknown if this could be the production team staging events or the Ghost Hunters having more publicized active locations to choose from. Consequently, the exploration of output findings based on methods herein may be enhanced with additional data. Conclusion The haunted locations investigated by Ghost Hunters do not have a significant correlation with suitable locations for paranormal activity to manifest, however some of the criteria use in the suitability analysis do suggest a significant correlation with alleged haunted locations. Furthermore, correlation does not represent causation. For 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p7.6
in the suitability analysis do suggest a significant correlation with alleged haunted locations. Furthermore, correlation does not represent causation. For this research project to be successful, paranormal theories for causation need to be researched further. In addition, the paranormal research community must be willing to work together and share their findings to utilize spatial analysis. Once better guidelines are established to determine the proximity to environmental features paranormal activity requires to manifest, the results of this type of analysis will provide a greater contribution to both the paranormal and scientific communities. 	Using GIS to Analyze Relationships to Explore Paranormal Occurrences in the:  p7.79
